 I'll be the main user of this app: i'm a curious reader with almost no arabic grammer knowledge, and some arabic keyword exposure due to loanword (i'm also a turkish speaker) but I realized that those loanwords for theological matters shifted,narrowed,or lost meanings. So, i want to make sure (now comes 3 layers of the app): 1) the primary reading is not disorienting while revealing what each word loses, and better describe the arabic concept (like, oku for iqra is expanding it and i want to see something like 'toparla ve disari aktar' whereas it is now disorienting; i need a balance there. my solution was to make up to 3 glosses available, and show error profiles with each of them, and maybe a flag that even if oku is the least disorienting, the flag will tell me that I must check other glosses (to see 'toparla ve disari aktar' is the right translation of the core concept). 2) Since i do not know arabic, i want to make sure i can see what each word functions towards building the ayah. for example, turkish doesn't have 'the', or english doesn't have double 'the's in the case of as-sirat al-mustaqim. I want to make sure these are revealed when i want to check an individual word, and also interplay of words and their resonances within intra-ayah and closeby inter-ayah resonances (mostly through v12 cross-run findings, and some latent-activation intra-surah channels). For those ones, any suprising reading or finding that helps me to understand the dry primary reading should survive and be explained - not catalogued. I want to see how they connect. so far i have a catalog but since i do not know arabic, i cannot naturally integrate them to see secondary latent activations, resonances, or images (i use word channel for them) that a careful arabic speaker can find and have the 'aha moment'. think about the water distribution image inside fatiha: non-primary (mainstream translation) branches have rain, water collection, grass, well, and even a pulley/crossbeam that is used to collect water making a coherent system where God (actually, Rab resonates more because he is the nurturer mentioned in the surah) makes sure his creatures in all "alem"s are taken care of. this is an 'aha' reading, a suprising reading that helps me to understand what's going on. and here is a hard question, because in 3) I want to see those comprehensive channels and their relations within surah and how each ayah or each particular word contributes to, while not loading all information into individual ayahs. this #3 is the surah level commentary that builds this wholistic image (that is a must for S100, for example, where running horses has nothing to do with the rest of the surah if you read the primary translation, but it then magically becomes a suprise when you see the resonances) but then i need to make sure reading it doesn't disorient me and still keep my feet on the ground. one idea was to mention #3 channels in #2 through revealing only  mature channels in #2 readings, making sure reader (me) is oriented and warmed up. like, in 1:6, saying that "yol imgesi na'budu kelimesinin cagristirdigi mu'abbad, yani tekrar tekrar uzerinde yurune yurune meydana gelen yol imgesi ile daha once bahsedilen yol isaretleri (alemin) ile birleserek bir yol ve yolcu goruntusunu ortaya cikarir / sezdirir" , and then in 1:7 saying "en'amte yolcunun vardigi ve karsilandigi konak anlamini da tasir; boylece ancak yardimla yuruyebilen bir yolcuya yaraticinin onden giderek yol gostermesi (malik), yol isaretlerinin belirgin olmasi (alemin), yolun bir group tarafinan yurune yurune ortaya cikarilmasi (na'budu), yolun sadece dosdogru degil, ayni zamanda yolcusunu yutuyormuscasia icinde ilerletmesi (sirat) ve yolcunun yaraticidan kendine yolu gosterip ona ulastirip onda ilerletmesi (na'budu) gorunur kilinir. dallin ise sahibi/bakicisi olmayan yolunu kaybetmis hayvan imgesi ile topraga gomulmus ve kaybolmus olma imgeleriyle bir yolcunun en buyuk tehlikesini one cikarir ve duayi neyden korunmak istendigi ile tamamlar".