<<chunk 8, part 5 of 0..5>>
 بن طلحة): Musa ibn Talha reports God's instruction to Solomon to remember Him if anyone sneezes, even beyond seven seas. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): When someone sneezes and says al-hamd, an angel responds “Lord of the worlds”; when the sneezer repeats it, the angel says “may God have mercy on you.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (علي بن أبي طالب): A report attributed to Ali says that saying “al-hamd lillah rabb al-alamin” at each heard sneeze prevents toothache and earache. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (واثلة بن الأسقع): Wathila reports that praising God when greeting a sneezer prevents abdominal illness; another report says God told Solomon to remember Him when someone sneezes e ven seven seas away."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p8", "position": "Praise and the declaration of oneness have distinct reported merits.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (طائفة): Another group considers la ilaha illa Allah better because it repels unbelief and associating partners, and people fight on its basis; they cite the Prophet’s command to fight until people say it. QURTUBI, d. 671 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya chooses la ilaha illa Allah as superior, citing the report that it is the best thing the Prophet and earlier prophets said. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is lā ilāha illā Allāh and the best supplication is al-ḥamdu lillāh; al-Tirmidhi grades this report ḥasan gharīb. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (طائفة): A group holds that al-ḥamdu lillāhi rabbi l-ʿālamīn is better than lā ilāha illā Allāh because it combines praise with monotheism. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (آخرون): Others hold that lā ilāha illā Allāh is superior because it distinguishes faith from unbelief and is the formula people must profess; reports also call it the best remembrance. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says the best remembrance is there is no god but God, while the best supplication is al-hamdulillah; al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is “la ilaha illa Allah” and the best supplication is “al-hamd lillah.”"}]}

<<end of chunk>>
