<<chunk 8, part 4 of 0..5>>
DYQURAN (author): Some take the worlds as four communities: humans, jinn, angels, and satans."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p3", "position": "Praise is worth more than a received blessing.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-hamdu lillah is better than ash-shukru lillah because it praises God for every benefit to the worlds, even one not received by the speaker; shukr is personal gratitude. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Existence is better than nonexistence, and every possible existent receives its existence from God; hence every creature receives His blessing and mercy. QURTUBI, d. 671 (طائفة): One group considers praise of God better than the declaration of unity because praise includes both tawhid and praise, while the declaration includes tawhid alone. QURTUBI, d. 671 (الحسن): Al-Hasan says that no blessing exists for which praise of God is not better than the blessing itself. QURTUBI, d. 671 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Anas reports from the Prophet that when God gives a servant a blessing and the servant praises Him, the praise is better than what was received. QURTUBI, d. 671 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report in Nawādir al-uṣūl from Anas says that if someone possessed the whole world and then praised God, the praise would be better than it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن): Hasan says that no blessing is better than saying “Praise belongs to God.” QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Anas says that if someone owned the whole world and then said alhamdulillah, the praise would be better than it. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Anas reports that when a servant praises God for a blessing, the reward for that praise is better than the blessing received. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (القرطبي): Al-Qurtubi transmits a report that praising God would be better than possessing the whole world; he explains that the enduring reward for praise exceeds transient worldly enjoyment. | mentions 18:46 DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): In a hasan report, the Prophet says praise after a blessing is better than the blessing received. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says al-hamd is better than any blessing bestowed on a servant. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says that if someone possessed the entire world and then said al-hamdulillah, the praise would be better than it all. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sound report says the praise offered for any divine blessing is better than the blessing received; related reports extend this to every blessing and all the world. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (هارون بن موسى): Hārūn b. Mūsā reads al-ḥamda in the accusative, like Arabs who use definite verbal nouns with an omitted verb; the implied “we praise” suits worship and seeking help better than royal “we.” | mentions 1:5 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah is better than inna al-hamd lillah because believers do not doubt the claim, and the unmarked formula can report praise while enacting exaltation; inna makes it mere report. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah is better than lillah al-hamd here: fronting lillah suggests exclusivity or rebuttal of doubt, neither of which fits this address to believers."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p4", "position": "The praise fulfills a vow of gratitude.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): The Prophet uses rabb to mean owner, asking a man whether he owns sheep or camels. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): In a weakly chained report, the Prophet treats saying al-hamdulillah after his stolen camel returned as fulfilling his vow to thank God. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): Ali reports that the Prophet vowed to thank God properly if his family expedition returned safely; on their return he said al-hamdulillah for God's abundant favors and counted that as fulfilling the vow. DURR, d. 911 (جعفر بن محمد): Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad tells how he vowed to praise God with approved praises if his mule returned, then said al-hamdulillah alone because it encompasses all praise. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): When a returned camel prompted the Prophet to fulfill a vow of gratitude, he said “al-hamd lillah,” which the Companions accepted as thanks. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): After an expedition returned safely, the Prophet fulfilled his pledge to thank God by saying “al-hamd lillah.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report about an Ansar expedition says the Prophet pledged thanks if they returned safe with spoils, then said he had fulfilled that pledge and praised God. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (جعفر بن محمد): When Jaafar ibn Muhammad's mule returned, he thanked God with only “al-hamd lillah,” saying this gathered all praise. ITQAN, d. 911 (علي): Ali said, as transmitted by Ibn Abi Jamra, that he could load seventy camels with commentary on the Umm al-Qur’an; the source explains the remark by showing how much each phrase requires. ALUSI, d. 1270 (النواس بن سمعان): Al-Ṭabarānī reports from al-Nawwās b. Samʿān that the Prophet vowed to thank God if his she-camel returned; when it did, he said al-ḥamdu lillāh, and the Companions expected further prayer or fasting. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī takes the article in al-ḥamdu as generic: it points to the familiar notion of praise, as in Labīd’s verse describing the camels. ALUSI, d. 1270 (لبيد): Labīd’s line, cited as linguistic evidence, uses al-ʿirāk for the camels pressing together at the watering place. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (النواس بن سمعان): Al-Ṭabarānī reports that after the Prophet’s she-camel was stolen, he vowed to thank God if it returned; when it did, he said alhamdulillah, and the Companions awaited fasting or prayer, showing they understood gratitude as action. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق): When al-Sadiq's father recovered a lost mule, he praised God only by saying الحمد لله and explained that every kind of praise is contained in that phrase."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p5", "position": "Praise brings an increase.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Praise thanks God for past blessings and brings future increase, as promised in the Qur’an; it closes barriers and opens the way to knowledge of God, hence the name al-Fātiḥa. | mentions 14:7 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report attributed to the Prophet says that whoever says al-ḥamdu lillāhi rabbi l-ʿālamīn has thanked God, who then increases him. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): A weak report from the Companion al-Hakam ibn Umayr says that saying Lord of the worlds is gratitude to God, bringing an increase. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الحكم بن عمير): In a weak report, saying “al-hamd lillah rabb al-alamin” counts as thanking God, after which He increases the speaker. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Giving stands above receiving, so the station of the praised giver is the highest rank; the joy of this rank culminates in further hamd and increased gifts. | mentions 14:7 STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): The Prophet says that praising God, Lord of the worlds, constitutes thanks and brings increased bounty."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p6", "position": "Praise fills the balance.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Malik al-Ashʿari reports from the Prophet that purification is half of faith, praise fills the balance, and glorification with prai se fills or fills the space between heaven and earth; Qurtubi cites Muslim. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Malik al-Ashʿari reports that purification is half of faith, praise fills the balance, and glorification with praise fills the space between heaven and earth. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says purification is half of faith and al-hamd fills the balance; other phrases fill the space between heaven and earth, while prayer, charity, patience, and the Quran serve as signs or testimony. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): A man of Banu Sulaym reports that the Prophet said al-hamd fills the balance, while other remembrances fill the space between heaven and earth; purification and fasting are each half of a measure. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says glorification is half the balance and al-hamd fills it; there is no barrier between God and the declaration of divine unity. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says purification is half of faith, al-hamd fills the balance, and glorification fills the space between heaven and earth, among other deeds' spiritual benefits. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Another report says al-hamd fills the balance, while tasbih is half of it and takbir fills the space between heaven and earth. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Umar reports that al-hamd fills the balance and there is no barrier between “la ilaha illa Allah” and God. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Quranic rhetoric includes composition, context, implication, modes of expression, logic, wisdom, and the verbal and semantic beauties that secure fluency, force, balance, and inimitability."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p7", "position": "The praise is said at a sneeze.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A report says Adam’s first words were al-ḥamdu lillāh after he sneezed; the people of Paradise end with the same praise, so the world begins and ends with it. | mentions 10:10 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas calls praise the expression of every grateful person, citing Adam’s praise at a sneeze and praise by Noah, Abraham, David and Solomon, the Prophet, and Paradise’s people. | mentions 23:28, 14:39, 27:15, 17:111, 35:34, 10:10 DURR, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas describes an exchange at sneezing: the sneezer says al-hamdulillah, an angel answers Lord of the worlds, and after the sneezer repeats it the angel asks God to show mercy. DURR, d. 911 (علي بن أبي طالب): Ali says that whoever says the full praise at every sneeze heard, in any circumstance, will never suffer toothache or earache. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says whoever anticipates a sneezer with praise will be spared abdominal illness. DURR, d. 911 (موسى
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
