<<chunk 13, part 4 of 0..5>>
l-Alusi; some explicitly give no grading. Anas or Sufyan al-Thawri transmit 'when the Lord is mentioned, stop.' Abu Hurayra, Ibn Abbas, and Abu Dharr transmit the creation-versus-Creator instruction because thought cannot encompass Him, with Abu Dharr warning of ruin. Al-Thaʿlabi's Abu Hurayra report describes layers of earth, heavens, and a sea in the seventh heaven. Ibn Kathir says the wording of Abu Hurayra's raised report is not preserved; he cites a sound Satanic-question hadith requiring refuge and stopping, and a Sunan report including an angel's three-hundred-year earlobe-to-shoulder distance. Al-Qurtubi also links the Satanic-question hadith and cites a poem directing thought from God's essence to His works. Al-Durr transmits Yunus ibn Maysara's account of the companions discussing God's greatness and the Prophet redirecting them, and a Kufa imam's report of reflection on the sun and a radiant western land inhabited by beings unaware whether Adam or Iblis was created. Al-Biqai adds Ibn Abbas's inability-to-grasp-God's-measure report. Imam al-Sadiq applies the verse to stopping speech when it reaches God. Imam al-Baqir warns Ziyad that forbidden disputation brings doubt, void deeds, and confusion, or wandering in a variant. Al-Wahidi specifies that divine knowledge, essence, and modality cannot be comprehended; al-Alusi says most transmitted proofs indicate the essence cannot be known in its full reality. Al-Jishumi gives no grading for the creation report. Al-Qushayri transmits an unnamed saying to fall silent when speech reaches God. Al-Itqan reports al-Baghawi explicitly comparing Ubayy's no-contemplation explanation with the instruction to reflect on God's creatures rather than His essence."}, {"id": "53:42/q07/p2", "position": "The warning especially guides people unprepared for difficult rational inquiry; the stop-at-God report is an expanded application of 'ending.'", "reasons": "Al-Tabatabai says difficult speculation risks lasting ruin for such people, and interprets Imam al-Sadiq's instruction as a broader application rather than limiting the verse's entire meaning. He rejects making the thought-limit reading exclusive."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q11", "question": "How is ending with God understood inwardly?", "turns_on": "These reports develop different experiential images of reaching God: transformed will, converging paths, vanished effects, and boundless reality.", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q11/p1", "position": "Knowing God's lordship removes temptation and leaves the servant willing only what God chooses.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAtaʾ, reported by al-Sulami, says every trial turns away when a servant reaches that knowledge. Bursevi reports his formulation that whoever begins from God ends with Him and loses any will apart from God's choice."}, {"id": "53:42/q11/p2", "position": "All paths to God converge in one end, despite the number of paths matching creatures' breaths.", "reasons": "Bursevi says their unity lies in the end and God brings the seeker after death to the aspiration sought."}, {"id": "53:42/q11/p3", "position": "Contingent things begin and end in God, then disappear while their abiding cause remains.", "reasons": "Al-Husayn defines tawhid through God's encompassing presence in al-Sulami's account, citing 'He is the First' (57:3); Bursevi reports his cause-and-effect formulation."}, {"id": "53:42/q11/p4", "position": "God's boundlessness dwarfs all other existences as a sea dwarfs streams and seas.", "reasons": "Bursevi quotes Rumi's poetic comparison."}, {"id": "53:42/q11/p5", "position": "After knowing God, the servant receives further divine kindnesses, including gifts, fulfilled hopes, and spiritual states.", "reasons": "Al-Qushayri reports this as an unnamed saying about what remains after the servant reaches knowledge of God."}]}
{"id": "70:22/q02", "question": "From what are the worshippers excepted?", "turns_on": "Whether the exception is stated only against the immediate human traits or also against their final outcome.", "positions": [{"id": "70:22/q02/p1", "position": "They are exempt from the human tendency to panic in adversity and withhold good in prosperity.", "reasons": "Muqatil names anxiety and miserliness. Sahl, as reported by Sulami, contrasts despair in poverty and withholding in wealth with enabled worshippers. Samarrai explicitly applies the exception to both sides of haluʿ in 70:20–21. Abu Hayyan contrasts patience in hardship and the noble traits that follow. Biqai says prayer restrains this nature so neither distress nor withholding becomes extreme; the worshippers seek God's pleasure. Bursevi calls this a transformation of blameworthy traits. Baydawi and Alusi describe obedience, care for others, belief in judgment, fear of punishment, restrained desire, and preference for the hereafter as the opposing qualities. Tabatabai says prayer heads the good works because of its strong effect against greed, citing 29:45 for its restraint of shameful conduct and wrongdoing. Kuranyolu connects the cure to responsibility rooted in afterlife belief, worship, and constructive conduct. Study Quran's R and Z prefer the implication that the condemned traits describe humanity broadly because praying people are exempted. Al-Tabatabai cites this exception from anxiety in hardship and withholding in prosperity as evidence of prayer's importance against Satan's effects in his discussion of 5:91."}, {"id": "70:22/q02/p2", "position": "Believing worshippers are also spared the torment and evil end and honored in gardens.", "reasons": "Elmalili ties the exception to the following virtues and the final promise of honor in gardens. Samarrai connects their deliverance from Hell's punishment to their turning toward obedience and truth, in contrast to those whom Hell calls for turning away."}]}
{"id": "74:11/q04", "question": "What does 'alone' describe and mean here?", "turns_on": "The grammatical attachment of the circumstantial accusative to God, the created person, or the speaker's pronoun; whether an epithet is recalled, mocked, or understood as blame.", "positions": [{"id": "74:11/q04/p1", "position": "The man was created alone, initially without wealth, children, or support.", "reasons": "Ibn Qutayba, Mujāhid and many others specify no wealth or sons; Wāḥidī's majority also says no wife. Tabarī, Thaʿlabī, Bagha wī and others put him in his mother's womb. Qushayrī says without a supporter; Iṣlāḥī adds status, companions and confidants; Biqāʿī says from nothing, through stages, with no property. Grammatically waḥīdan is the circumstantial accusative of the created man, the relative man, or its omitted object, as Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān, Nasafī, Samīn and Ibn ʿĀshūr explain; Naḥḥās and Zajjāj identify a circumstantial accusative. Abū Ḥayyān calls this the apparent parse; Ibn ʿAtiyya prefers it if the nickname is unproved. Kashshāf, Rāzī, Elmalılı and Iṣlāḥī compare the solitary first creation at 6:94. God later gave him wealth and sons, intensifying his ingratitude; Muqātil, Qatāda, Māwardī, Kashshāf, Qurṭubī, Ibn Kathīr and others make that contrast. Al-Farrāʾ calls the reading that the man was created without wealth or sons more comprehensive than the reading that God created him alone."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p2", "position": "God alone created the man, without any partner in creation.", "reasons": "Zajjāj gives this as the other referent of the circumstantial accusative. Wāḥidī attributes the construction to al-Farrāʾ, al-Kisāʾī and Zajjāj: God knows the man and has power over him. Kashshāf, Rāzī, Samīn, Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān and Ālūsī add that the sole Creator can own, avenge or destroy him without help. Biqāʿī draws a contrast with the man's shirk. Ṭabāṭabāʾī prefers this parse, because God alone created and managed the man and can be entrusted with him. Elmalılı and Asad emphasize the Creator's uniqueness."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p3", "position": "God is alone with the man to avenge and punish him.", "reasons": "Waḥīdan is circumstantial from the first-person object of dharnī, as Rāzī, Bayḍāwī, Nasafī and Samīn explain. Mujāhid, cited by Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān and Ālūsī, says God suffices as the man's avenger; Kashshāf says no other avenger is needed. Ṭabāṭabāʾī reports this parse without preferring it."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p4", "position": "It alludes, often derisively, to al-Walīd's epithet 'the Unique One' or his boast of being without equal.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAbbās says he was called al-Waḥīd; ʿAṭāʾ reports his boast 'unique son of the unique,' unequaled among Arabs. Reports explain the title by unmatched wealth, sons, rank and leadership; Ibn ʿĀshūr says he was older than Abū Jahl and Abū Sufyān. Al-Qummī instead says he claimed sole responsibility for one year's Kaʿba covering while Quraysh shared the next. Kashshāf says the title may postdate the verse; otherwise the verse mocks worldly distinction by recalling destitution. Rāzī and Samīn parse it as an accusative of disparagement, with Ṭabāṭabāʾī reporting an implied 'I condemn.' Ibn ʿĀshūr says the wording shifts from his boast to dependence at birth, citing 16:78. Wāḥidī rejects the nickname as the intended sense because God would appear to affirm a false boast; Ibn ʿAtiyya finds its report unproved. Rāzī answers that a proper name need not assert its quality, or means unique in his own estimation, citing 44:49; Qurṭubī likewise says a boast can be repeated without endorsement."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p5", "position": "It disparages him as uniquely wicked, lowly, or insignificant.", "reasons": "Rāzī says uniqueness need not denote rank: it can mark unbelief, vileness and lowliness. Bayḍāwī, Samīn, Abū Ḥayyān, Bursawī and Ālūsī similarly turn the boast into blame. Abū Ḥayyān cites the proper-name response to an objection over insult; Bursawī cites 44:49."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p6", "position": "It disparages him as having unknown paternity or being born outside marriage.", "reasons": "Abū Saʿīd al-Ḍarīr takes waḥīdan as a second object of
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
