<<chunk 720 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:24 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:24 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
$ And if you do not, and you will not, then be mindful of the Fire
whose fuel is men and stones, which is prepared for the disbelievers.24
The stones are usually taken to be sulfur or the idols (2:22) worshipped
by the polytheists (IK; cf. 22:6). The structure (
if you do not, and you will not)
shows that the conditional if is not an expression of uncertainty in the case of
God, any more than laʿalla expresses anxiety (see 2:21c). It conveys a certainty
rather than a contingency.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:28 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:28 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
( How can you disbelieve in God, seeing that you were dead and He
gave you life; then He causes you to die; then He gives you life; then
unto Him shall you be returned?28
The four stages mentioned here are before birth, during earthly life,
earthly death, and resurrection. (See also 40:11: They will say, “Our Lord, Thou
hast caused us to die twice over, and given us life twice over.”) The initial
lifelessness (lit. “dead”) is understood either as one’s “existence” in the material
stuff of the body, literally in the loins of one’s parents or the dust of the earth, or
as the state of being a thing unremembered (76:1) or “unknown” in that a thing is
called “dead” among the Arabs when its traces are effaced and it is not“mentioned” or “remembered” (
madhkūr, Ṭ). In either case, it refers to our“nonexistence” before our life in this world. Someone like the Sufi mystic IbnʿArabī (d. 638/1240) would understand the “lifelessness” of our pre-earthly
condition to be a state of nonmanifestation within God’s Knowledge as opposed
to nothingness in the ordinary sense of this term. That to which life is first given
would thus be that form (ṣūrah
) in God’s eternal Knowledge.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:29 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:29 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
) He it is Who created for you all that is on the earth. Then He
turned to Heaven and fashioned it into seven heavens, and He is
Knower of all things.29
For God’s creation of things for human beings, see also 16:5; 16:13;
26:166. This idea also relates to God’s making creation subservient to human
beings as in 22:65; 31:20; 45:13. Turned to translates the verb istawā, which is
also rendered “mounted” in other contexts; see also 7:54; 10:3; 20:5; 25:59;
32:4; 57:4. For the seven heavens, also see 41:12, where the context is the six
days of creation; 67:3, in which they are one upon another; 65:12, which also
mentions the creation from the earth the like thereof—that is, earths upon earths;
the early Quran commentator Mujāhid (d. 104/722–23) mentions “heavens
above one other” and “earths above one another”; and 71:15, which also
mentions the “levels” of heavens.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:30 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:30 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ð And when thy Lord said to the angels, “I am placing a vicegerent
upon the earth,” they said, “Wilt Thou place therein one who will
work corruption therein, and shed blood, while we hymn Thy praise
and call Thee Holy?” He said, “Truly I know what you know not.”30
Vicegerent renders khalīfah, a word that can also mean “successor” or“deputy,” hence khalīfat rasūl Allāh, or “successor/steward of God’s
Messenger,” shortened to khalīfah (anglicized as “caliph”). In some verses, such
as here and 6:165, khalīfah appears to denote a universal human inheritance and
responsibility, since all human beings are in their inner reality the khalīfah of
God. In others, the sense of “successor” comes to the fore (e.g., 7:69, which
refers to vicegerents after the people of Noah
). See also 7:74; 10:14; 10:73;
27:62; 35:39. At another level of interpretation, some commentators say that
khalīfah comes from khalafa (“to come after”) and means that human beings
come after all creatures and all grades of being are summarized in the human
state.
Ibn ʿAbbās is reported to have said that Iblīs was a member of a tribe of
angels called al-ḥinn (a word related to jinn
), was named al-Ḥārith, and was a
custodian of Paradise. All the angels were created from light, except this tribe,
which was created from “smokeless fire” (cf. 55:15). The first to inhabit the
earth were the jinn, who caused corruption there and spilled blood. Then God
sent Iblīs among that host of angels called al-ḥinn
. Iblīs and his compatriots
killed them and sent them off to the islands of the sea and the edges of the
mountains. He was filled with pride for accomplishing something no one else
had done. After Adam’s body was created from clay, it remained a lifeless form
for forty years, during which Iblīs taunted it by flying in and out of it, saying,“You are nothing! If I come to power over you, I will destroy you, and if you
come to power over me, I will defy you.” Then it was said to those angels who
were with Iblīs (not all the angels) that they should prostrate before Adam. Iblīs
said, “No, I will not prostrate before him. I am better than him, older, and
greater. You created me from fire, while you created him from clay” (cf. 7:12;Ṭ). The only other indication in the Quran of such an order of creation is found
in 15:26–27: And We indeed created man from dried clay, made of molded mud,
and the jinn We created earlier from scorching fire.
That jinn inhabited the earth before human beings is accepted by many
commentators. But al-Rāzī prefers the opinion that God spoke to all the angels,
not only those who warred alongside Iblīs. Nevertheless, some specifics of the
story, such as that Iblīs was a member of a tribe of angels, can hardly be counted
as reliable and are certainly from popular narratives, since an authority such as
Ibn ʿAbbās would have known that the Quran in 18:50 identifies Iblīs as a jinn,
not an angel.
It does, however, provide one possible explanation for the angels’ question,
Wilt Thou place therein . . . , namely, that they had previous experience with the
blood and corruption of the earth’s previous inhabitants. However, many
commentators explain the angels’ apparently audacious question as an
expression of wonder on their part, rather than doubt or concern (R). They
marvel at God’s Wisdom, but are not alarmed by it. It is thought that
disobedience or any brand of rebelliousness is impossible for angels, though al-
Rāzī notes that the Muʿtazilites believed that angels could be disobedient.
Hymn Thy praise and call Thee Holy can also be read, “We glorify Thee
while praising Thee” (Z); cf. 32:15; 39:75; 42:5. I know what you know not is
generally understood to mean that, despite the inevitability of bloodletting and
corruption, good things will come of the creation of human beings, but only God
knows what they are (R). As mentioned in 2:11–12c, such corruption can also
refer to the degradation of the natural environment.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:55 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:55 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
U And when you said, “O Moses, we will not believe thee till we see
God openly,” and the thunderbolt seized you as you looked on.55
Cf. 4:153. The thunderbolt, related etymologically to Moses’ swoon
(7:143) and the “swoon” of the heavens and earth at the blowing of the trumpet
(e.g., 39:68) on the Day of Judgment, is also a punishment for the ʿĀd and the
Thamūd (41:13). The Thamūd’s thunderbolt also seized them as they looked on.
It can also refer more generally to a great calamity or destruction, or a great cry
or noise, a fire, or an earthquake (Ṭ).
Some commentators (IK, R) identify this verse with the incident described in
7:155, which would mean that after the destruction of the calf, Moses went up
the mountain with seventy of the choicest Israelites among those who
worshipped the calf. Upon their request to see God, a thunderbolt (ṣāʿiqah)
struck them dead, after which Moses prayed for their revival, which God
granted. Others (JJ) consider 2:55 and 7:155 as separate incidents, and some take
no firm position (R). The word rendered thunderbolt (ṣāʿiqah
) has a broader
range of meaning than rajfah (the word used for the “calamity” mentioned in
7:155), but they could also refer to the same event. To see openly (
jahratan),
which is also used with reference to speech (e.g., 21:110), means to see with
one’s eyes, or simply “publicly.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:85 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:85-86 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Å And yet it is you, the very same, who kill your own and expel a
party of you from their homes, conspiring against them in sin and
enmity. And if they come to you as captives you ransom them, though
their expulsion was forbidden to you. Do you, then, believe in part of
the Book and disbelieve in part? And what is the recompense of those
who do so but disgrace in the life of this world? And on the Day of
Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most severe punishment.
And God is not heedless of what you do.Æ It is they who have purchased the world at the price of the
Hereafter; for them the punishment shall not be lightened, nor will
they be helped.85–86
According to some, believe in part of the Book and disbelieve in
part refers to the contradiction between the initial expulsion, which would be a
violation of the Book, and the ransom, which would be in accord with the Book(Ṭ). Others connect the disbelief in this verse with the prophecies foretelling the
coming of the Prophet Muhammad, though this is not implied by the context (R).
Here the wider sense of kufr, or “disbelief,” as rejection and denial of certain
truths comes to the fore, as the lack of belief and faith in part is not a direct
disbelief in God’s existence. Rather, the expulsion and taking of ransom are acts
of hypocrisy and immorality, which are not separable from a certain degree of
kufr.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:106 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:106 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ć No sign do We 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
