<<chunk 720 part 1 of 0..1>>
abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but that We bring
that which is better than it or like unto it. Dost thou not know that God
is Powerful over all things?
106
Naskh, usually translated “abrogation,” has the meaning of conveyance
or copying from an original, which could extend to the notion that the entire
Quran is a naskh, or “copy” in relation to its origin in the Preserved Tablet
(85:22; Th), or something as simple as a written copy of a text. The more
relevant sense in this context is “to erase” or “to obliterate,” often described as
the action that the sun performs on a shadow, the wind upon dust, or even old
age upon youth. The root n-s-kh appears four times in the Quran: in this verse; in
7:154, referring to the inscription of the tablets of Moses; in 22:52, where God
effaces the work of Satan; and in 45:29, in regard to the recording of human
actions.
Naskh (“abrogation”) as a technical term is a key concept in the fully
developed form of Islamic jurisprudence, theology, and Quranic commentary,
and is a major conceptual tool for understanding the relationship between
different commands and prohibitions in the Quran and the Sunnah. It is a crucial
concept for understanding how the Quran is actually used as a source of Islamic
Law and practice, and thus many of the classical commentators devote
considerable attention to this particular verse. Other verses often mentioned in
this connection are God effaces what He will and establishes, and with Him is
the Mother of the Book (13:39); And when We replace one sign with another
(16:101); and And if We willed, We could take away that which We revealed unto
thee (17:86).
In its mainstream interpretation, naskh refers to the replacement of one legal
ruling (ḥukm
) by another one that is instituted or revealed later in time, in which
case the original text remains in the Quran, but is no longer binding as a matter
of law or practice. As widely understood in the Islamic religious sciences, naskh
can occur only in matters of commands and prohibitions, not in descriptive
passages relating to metaphysics, ethics, history, the nature of God, or the
Hereafter; a ruling (ḥukm
) is a determination of legal status, not doctrine. Thus
there can be no abrogation of a passage such as God has power over all things
(2:259) or Whosoever believes in God and the Last Day and works righteousness
shall have their reward with their Lord. No fear shall come upon them, nor shall
they grieve (2:62); or accounts of previous prophets found throughout the Quran.
Naskh would not apply to commandments so universal as to be irrevocable, such
as the prohibitions against murder, theft, and adultery and the command to be
kind to one’s parents.
Other kinds of naskh have also been posited by some, such as the naskh of
both text and ruling. A report attributed to the Prophet’s wife ʿĀʾishah, for
example, states that there were commands in the Quran relating to suckling that
are now neither acted upon nor part of the Quran (see 4:23c). Another type is
naskh of the text despite a continuation of its ruling, and the example most often
cited here is the punishment of adultery by stoning. In a report attributed toʿUmar, a verse commanding stoning was part of the Quran, but now is not, even
though the command of stoning for adultery remains in effect (according to
many, if not most, jurists; IK, R, Ṭ). On the question of the “stoning verse,” see
24:2c.
Although it is generally agreed that one Quranic ruling may abrogate another
Quranic ruling revealed earlier in time, there has been considerable difference of
opinion about other kinds of naskh, for example, whether Prophetic practice(
Sunnah
) can abrogate the Quran or vice versa, and whether the consensus of the
learned community (
ijmāʿ) can abrogate a ruling from the Quran or a ḥadīth.
Moreover, although there has been near universal agreement among the majority
of jurists that naskh exists, there has been considerable variation on which verses
of the Quran and aspects of Sunnah are abrogated. Scholars such as the famous
Islamic thinker and reformer Shāh Walī Allāh of Delhi (d. 1176/1762) placed the
number of abrogated verses at 5; the commentator Ibn al-Jawzī named no less
than 247; many other lists exist in between, such as Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī’s list
of 21 instances. A minority of scholars, such as Abū Muslim al-Iṣfahānī (d.
934/1527), have gone so far as to say that abrogation, as a technical concept
defined by the mainstream legal tradition, does not actually exist and that the
apparently conflicting rulings can be reconciled.
Even among the mainstream upholders of naskh, abrogation must be
distinguished from (1) specification, where a verse does not contradict but
provides specification regarding the general ruling of another verse; (2) the
simple accumulation of law, which may or may not amount to an abrogation; and
(3) the disappearance of the circumstances or causes behind the ruling, its sababor ʿillah (“effective legal cause”). In all cases the question of naskh comes into
play as a practical matter only when the verses are considered to be
irreconcilable as legal rulings.
A small minority of scholars, such as Abū Muslim al-Iṣfahānī, reject
altogether the mainstream definition of naskh and employ the same passages to
make their case either that naskh takes place between religions (e.g., Islam in
relation to Judaism and Christianity), meaning that God replaces one religion
with another, or that sign (āyah
) in this verse means “miracle.” In the Quran
many things are called a sign: the she-camel of the Thamūd (17:59); the day and
the night (17:12); the Companions of the Cave (18:9); Zachariah’s lack of speech
for three days (19:10); Jesus (19:21); the white hand of Moses (20:22); Mary and
Jesus (21:91); the destruction of Noah’s people (25:37); the growth of vegetation
(26:8); the drowning of the Egyptians (26:67); the destruction of the people of
Lot (26:174); the miracles of Moses (28:36); the creation of the heavens and the
earth (29:44); the request by the disbelievers for a miracle (29:50); our creation
from dust (30:20); a series of items in 30:21–25, none of which refer to the
verses of the Quran, thus bearing significantly on the nature of the “abrogation”mentioned in the present verse.
Cause to be forgotten (
nunsīhā) can also be understood in the sense of“abandoning,” as in 9:67, They forgot God; so He forgot them, where it means to“forsake” or “spurn,” since God could not actually fail to remember something.
With different voweling (
nansaʾahā), this verb can mean literally “defer/delay,”in which case the phrase would denote those signs or verses (āyāt
) that were
abrogated and those that were left unchanged. Ibn Kathīr and others mention aḥadīth about two men who used to recite a sūrah that the Prophet had taught
them. Then one day they tried to recite it, but they could not manage even a
letter. They asked the Prophet about this inability, to which he replied, “It is one
of those that has been abrogated and forgotten, so leave it.” This would support a
reading of “forgetting” over “deferment.”In trying to make sense of how one verse of the Word of God could be“better” than another, some interpret better than it as an alleviation when it
comes to matters of this world and an intensification when it comes to matters of
the next world (Q, Ṭ). For example, when the night prayer was no longer an
imperative of the community (73:1, abrogated by 73:20), that was a change
toward ease in this world, but when the fast of Ramadan was imposed (2:185,
abrogating 2:184, according to this interpretation), it afforded a greater
opportunity for reward in the Hereafter. Thus, for some commentators the verse
must mean “No [ruling from a] sign do We abrogate . . . ,” so that it is the ruling,
not the sign, that is called “better.” Al-Ṭabarī, for example, compares this
implied phrase to the missing phrase “the love of” in the verse they were made to
drink [the love of] the calf into their hearts (v. 93), since they did not literally
drink the calf. Others mention an interpretation that better than it means “a good
from it” or “a good on account of it,” since the Arabic word for better (
khayr)
can also mean “a good,” depending on the context (Q).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:129 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:129 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ĩ Our Lord, raise up in their midst a messenger from among them,
who will recite Thy signs to them, and will teach them the Book and
Wisdom, and purify them. Truly Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.”129
The response to this prayer for a messenger is realized in v. 151, where
the Prophet is described in terms identical to those in this verse. The Book is
most often taken to be the Quran, while the Wisdom is understood to be the
Sunnah (the exemplary sayings and doings of the Prophet) or more generally
knowledge and understanding of the religion (Ṭ), although the pairing of the
Book and Wisdom has more universal import in the Quran and is also used in
connection with Jesus (3:48; 5:110), the Children of Israel (45:16), and the
House of Abraham (4:54).


<<end of chunk>>
