<<chunk 721 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:180 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:180 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ƀ It is prescribed for you, when death approaches one of you and he
leaves some good, to make a bequest for parents and kinsfolk in an
honorable way—an obligation upon the reverent.
180
Bequest (waṣiyyah
) is also used in 4:12 and 5:106. Here some good(
khayr
) means one’s property, as in, Whatever good you spend (2:272), and also,
Truly he is fierce in his love for good things (100:8). According to one
interpretation, the prescription here is a conditional one, being an obligation
upon the reverent only if one leaves some good, which does not make such a
bequest a universal obligation. This command would not change the status of
those who have debts or other financial obligations, which must be paid from
one’s property even after death. Thus the first phrase is taken to mean, “Should
one desire to make a bequest.” There are differences of opinion as to what
amount must be involved for a bequest to be made; some jurists assign a specific
amount, while others consider any sum, large or small, to be a possible bequest
(Q).
In general there are two main restrictions on bequests in Islamic Law: (1)
that they account for no more than a third of one’s property, and (2) that the
bequest not be designated for a person who automatically inherits according to
the Quranic injunctions concerning shares of inheritance. Some consider this
verse to be abrogated completely; others say it is partially abrogated in the case
of those legally entitled to an inheritance share as stipulated in 4:11–13, but
continues to apply in the case of others (Ṭs). Some, including the Shiites (who
have a substantially different interpretation of inheritance law from Sunnis when
it comes to the relationship between quota and nonquota heirs), believe that this
verse was not abrogated and that nothing in it contradicts any other verse of the
Quran.
The question of abrogation arises because of the ḥadīth, “Let there be no
bequests for heirs.” This ḥadīth, if taken as universally applicable, renders the
verses concerning bequests partially incompatible with those describing
inheritance shares. It means that one cannot make a bequest for those who,
according to the shares specified by the Quran, would receive part of the
deceased’s property automatically without any bequest. For some commentators
and jurists, such as al-Qurṭubī, the acceptance of this ḥadīth as binding shows
that the Sunnah can abrogate the Quran (see 2:106c for a discussion of
abrogation), while for others this shows that the present verse is not abrogated
for the very same reason, namely, that a ḥadīth, about which one has less
certainty (
yaqīn
) than about the Quran, cannot replace a ruling of the Quran (Ṭs).
Al-Qurṭubī acknowledges that the only text preventing a harmonization of the
Quranic injunctions regarding bequests and inheritance is this ḥadīth barring
bequests for heirs. Some have tried to harmonize them by saying that the parents
and relatives here are those who would not inherit in any case (e.g., parents who
were disbelievers and thus nonquota heirs).
As a moral issue, bequests are to be made first to relatives and only
secondarily to nonrelatives; early commentators severely condemned those who
would leave relatives in need while giving property to nonrelatives (Q). One
proof text for the one-third restriction on bequests is a ḥadīth in which the
Prophet said to a man who offered to make a bequest of two-thirds or one-half of
his wealth, “One-third, and a third is considerable. It is better to leave your heirs
free from want than to leave them destitute and begging from people.”Prior to the institution of the Quranic rules of bequest and inheritance, the
custom of Arabia was that male relations would inherit through the male line,
called agnatic inheritance. The Quranic shares, which included the nearest male
relatives, demoted the customary agnatic heirs to a secondary status in relation to
the inheritance shares; they could still inherit under Sunni law, but only from the
property left after the quota shares had been distributed. In Shiism, agnatic
inheritance is rejected, and a system of proximity in blood kinship is used for the
residual property after the distribution of the shares, applying equally for the
male and female lines.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:185 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:185 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ƅ The month of Ramadan is that wherein the Quran was sent down
as guidance to mankind, as clear proofs of guidance, and as the
Criterion. Let him among you who is present fast during that [month].
And whosoever is ill or on a journey, it is a number of other days. God
desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for you. [It is] so
that you may complete the number and magnify God for having
guided you, that haply you may give thanks.
185
Some mention accounts that the Quran first came down to the “earthly
heaven” (i.e., the lowest of the “seven heavens”) from the Preserved Tablet
(85:22) and remained there and then Gabriel brought it down passage by passage
to the Prophet (Q); see 97:1–2c. Muslims consider Ramadan a particularly
blessed month, both because it is the month of fasting and also because it is the
month when the Quran began to be revealed. In a ḥadīth, the Prophet said,“When Ramadan comes, the gates of the Garden are opened, and the gates of the
Fire are locked, and the satans are fettered.”When people fall ill or are traveling, they have the option of breaking the fast
and fasting on another day after Ramadan in order to make up for it. Opinions
range on how sick one must be and what type of journey qualifies. These
exemptions apply in another manner to the canonical prayers, which one can
shorten and combine when one is on a journey. To complete the number can
mean to make up all missed days of fasting by fasting on days other than those
of Ramadan or simply to complete the full number of days in the lunar month
itself, which is twenty-nine or thirty days.
Magnify God is thought to refer to the practice of chanting extra formulas of
takbīr (the chanting of Allāhu akbar, meaning “God is great!” or “God is greater”or “God is the greatest”), which takes place after the fast of Ramadan is over.
This magnification takes different forms, such as chanting formulas of takbīr
while on the way to the mosque for the ʿĪd prayer (the prayers in the morning
after the last day of Ramadan) or repeating magnifications after each prayer
during the three days of ʿĪd. Examples are “God is great, God is great, there is no
god but God, God is great, God be praised!” and “God is great and grand, and
praised be He often, and glorified be He day and night!” See also v. 203.
The exemptions from the rules of fasting (for the old, sick, traveling, etc.) are
part of the ease that God bestows; the Quran states that God does not desire
hardship for you, which is also mentioned in 22:78: He . . . has placed no
hardship for you in the religion (Sh). In this regard, some mention the ḥadīth of
the Prophet, “Make things easy, not difficult. Cause people to rejoice, not to
flee.”So that you may complete either is connected with the previous sentence and
refers to more of what God desires or is a continuation of the command to fast
from v. 183, so that it would mean, “Fasting is prescribed for you . . . so that you
may complete” (Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:200 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:200 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ȁ And when you have carried out your rites, remember God as you
remember your fathers, or with more ardent remembrance. For among
mankind are those who say, “Our Lord, give to us in this world,” but
have no share in the Hereafter.
200
Rites refers either to the sacrifice of animals, which take place duringʿId al-aḍḥā, or the Feast of Sacrifice, marking the end of the ḥajj, or to all the
rituals of the ḥajj whose essential purpose is the remembrance of God (Q). As
you remember your fathers points to the custom of the Arabs, at the conclusion
of the ḥajj, of engaging in the magnification and celebration of their ancestors’past glories, often in a spirit of rivalry (Q). Others interpret remember God as
you remember your fathers to mean that one should call upon and remember
God the way a small child calls upon mother and father, in a state of
helplessness, utter dependence, and trust (Q).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:219 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:219 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ș They ask thee about wine and gambling. Say, “In them there is
great sin and [some] benefits for mankind, but their sin is greater than
their benefit.” They ask thee what they should spend. Say, “What can
be spared.” Thus does God make clear unto you the signs, that haply
you may reflect
219
For a discussion of the proscription of drinking wine, see 4:43c.
Gambling renders maysir, which literally denotes one type of gambling;
gambling more generally is known as qimār
. In maysir people draw arrows over
meat, akin to drawing straws; the loser has to pay for the meat without getting
any and is chided and ribbed, while the winners give their portions to the poor as
a demonstration of generosity (Z). In this connection many of the commentators
discuss various kinds of “play” (laʿb
) and debate their legitimacy. In Islamic
Law generally gambling in the form of wagering is forbidden, while playing
games, such as chess and backgammon, as an idle pastime is frowned upon by
many as a spiritual distraction, usually without being forbidden outright. Both
games in fact came to the West from the Islamic world, and not being forbidden
in the technical legal sense, both are popular among Muslims, even many devout
ones.
Regarding the benefits for mankind in wine, al-Qurṭubī mentions that it helps
with digestion, makes a miserly person magnanimous, gives boldness to the
timid, gives color to the face, helps one to have sex, and
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
