<<chunk 721 part 1 of 0..1>>
 makes one feel good for
a short time. (Although this verse mentions specifically wine, Islamic Law
understands this ruling to apply to all alcoholic drinks.) As for the benefits of
gambling, he mentions that one can acquire wealth without effort and that the
poor can benefit, since it was customary for the winners to distribute the meat of
the maysir
. As for their harm, intoxication leads to loss of one’s rational
faculties, quarreling, violence, promiscuity, impaired judgment, and forgetting
the remembrance of God. In later judicial philosophy, the ruling on intoxication
played a major part in identifying “protection of the intelligence” as one of the
essential objectives of the Law (
maqāsid al-Sharīʿah
). Similarly, gambling
creates enmity and despair (R), produces ill-gotten gains, and is thus a diversion
from the healthy and wholesome pursuit of profit and gain. The risk associated
with gambling factors into Islamic financial theory, in that certain kinds of
transactions are invalid because they entail excessive risk, and this risk is related
to the prohibition against ribā (usually but imperfectly translated “usury”),
which is discussed by some Islamic financial theorists as carrying a severe form
of risk. Ribā is discussed in vv. 275–80.
On the question of spending in charity, what can be spared renders al-ʿafw,
which means “what is easy” or “what is done without difficulty” (R) and in other
contexts means “pardon” or “forgiveness.” There is disagreement over whether
this refers to voluntary giving or to a required duty. Among those who uphold
the former view are those who believe that this directive was abrogated by the
institution of the alms (
zakāh
); others point out that there is no contradiction
between the existence of the institution of the zakāh and a command to give
charity (Q). The commentators note here that this means that one should be
neither miserly nor improvident in matters of charity and that one should never
impoverish oneself as a result of charitable giving. This verse is seen as
expanding upon the question of giving in v. 215, which describes the recipients
of charity, by further describing how much one should give (Q). The extent of
proper charitable giving is also discussed in 17:29: And let not thine hand be
shackled to thy neck; nor let it be entirely open.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:2:258 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 2:258 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ɘ Hast thou not considered him who disputed with Abraham about
his Lord because God had given him sovereignty? When Abraham
said, “My Lord gives life and causes death,” he said, “I give life and
cause death.” Abraham said, “Truly God brings the sun from the east.
Bring it, then, from the west.” Thus was he who disbelieved
confounded. And God guides not wrongdoing people.
258
Commentators sometimes understand the antagonist here to be
Nimrod, though this is based on folkloric material; he is not named in any ḥadīth
and his place even in the Bible is ambiguous at best. It is said that this man who
disputed with Abraham brought out two people, killing one and leaving the other
alive, and said, I give life and cause death. A similar dynamic can be seen in the
conversation between Moses and Pharaoh, when Pharaoh said, I am your lord
most high (79:24). “Give life and cause death” appears in many places in the
Quran; see 2:28c.
Grammatically, the recipient of sovereignty could be either Abraham or his
antagonist, since Abraham’s descendants are described as having been given a
mighty sovereignty (4:54), but most commentators believe that it refers to the
worldly power of the other person (R). Abraham’s triumph in the encounter both
exposes the pretense of the ruler who sought to mimic God’s Power over life and
death and reflects a general Quranic theme that the world of nature is full of
signs of God. Abraham encounters the rising sun in a different context in 6:78.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:3:5 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 3:5 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Z Truly naught is hidden from God on earth or in Heaven.5
Cf. 14:38; 27:75.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:3:49 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 3:49 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
I And [he will be] a messenger to the Children of Israel, “Truly I
have brought you a sign from your Lord. I will create for you out of
clay the shape of a bird. Then I will breathe into it, and it will be a
bird by God’s Leave. And I will heal the blind and the leper and give
life to the dead by God’s Leave. And I will inform you about what
you eat and what you store up in your houses. Truly in that is a sign
for you, if you are believers.49
For a discussion of the miracles mentioned in this verse, see 5:110c,
where similar points are discussed. Although some opinions record that the blind
are those who can see during the day, but not at night, or they are the bleary-eyed
(aʿmash
), most commentators understand it to refer to those who are born blind.
The leper: leprosy was widely known in the ancient world, causing severe
disfigurement and nerve damage, and was highly contagious. Until recently it
was incurable by medical means.
And I will inform you . . . your houses: some relate that as a child Jesus
would tell his playmates or his classmates about what their parents were doing or
what they kept in their houses (R), while others say that this was in relation to a
time when the people were forbidden to store up food in their houses (R, Ṭ).
Others say that this refers to the table onto which food descended in 5:112–15,
adding to the story the detail that they were supposed to partake of the feast of
the table, but were not to store up any of it; they did so and were chastised for it(Ṭ). Jesus’ giving life to the dead is accepted in both the Quran and the Bible,
but the Quran emphasizes the fact that both Jesus’ giving life to the clay bird (not
found in the New Testament) and his raising of the dead were miracles that
happened by God’s Leave.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:4:36 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 4:36 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ö Worship God, and ascribe not partners unto Him. And be virtuous
toward parents and kinsfolk, toward orphans and the indigent, toward
the neighbor who is of kin and the neighbor who is not of kin, toward
the companion at your side and the traveler, and toward those whom
your right hands possess. Truly God loves not one who is a
vainglorious boaster,36
This is one of several verses that place virtue toward parents
immediately after the command to worship none but God (see also 2:83; 6:151;
17:23; 31:13–14) and enjoin kindness toward parents generally (46:15; 29:8).
The Arabic word here used to denote virtuous behavior is iḥsān, which comes
from a root meaning “beautiful”; various derivations from the root denote virtue,
moral beauty, and goodness or doing what is beautiful and good. In relation to
parents it has the meaning of filial piety. The list provided here of those to whom
one should be virtuous, kind, and charitable is similar to other such lists in the
Quran (cf. 2:83, 177, 215; 9:60; 16:90; 17:26; 30:38).
Although the neighbor who is of kin is generally considered to refer to one’s
family members, a minority tradition identifies it as a reference to Muslims
generally, that is, those to whom one is close in religion. The neighbor who is
not of kin, or al-jār al-junub, may mean nonfamily members or friends, but also
those who are distant from oneself geographically or in religion. The word junub
relates to something that is distant; the state of ritual impurity brought about by
sexual relations is also referred to as junub (4:43), meaning distance from prayer,
as one cannot pray until purifying oneself. This verse also enjoins virtue toward
slaves (
those whom your right hands possess
), which may mean freeing them, an
act repeatedly recommended as a form of expiation (cf. 4:92; 5:89; 58:3; 90:13),
or simply treating them well.
The companion at your side may refer to one’s traveling companion or more
specifically to one’s wife. The verse thus enjoins kindness and virtuous behavior
as a rule toward all, particularly toward those over whom one might have a
certain power because they are dependents (elderly parents, needy family or
orphans, wives) or lower in social status (orphans, non-Muslims, slaves). Al-
Qurṭubī asserts that similar enjoinders to kindness toward others are found in all
Divinely revealed books and can, in fact, be known through one’s intelligence
even without a scriptural command.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:4:42 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 4:42 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
B On that Day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger
will wish that they were level with the earth, and they will conceal no
account from God.42
On that Day—that is, the day the prophetic witnesses will be called
forth (v. 41)—the disbelievers and disobedient will be so terrified of being held
to account that they will long to be level with the earth, that is, to be
unnoticeable and so not accountable, in fact, to be nothing, for to be dust would
be preferable to being punished in the Fire. This is similar to the lament of the
disbelievers in 78:40: “Oh, would that I were dust!” The disbelievers’ wish to be
level with the earth may also connote a desire that the earth devour them or cave
in below them, for the earth is the active subject in the Arabic construction here.
The Quran is emphatic about the impossibility of concealing anything from God,
for even if people seek to lie about what they did in life, their own body parts
will testify against them on the Day of Judgment (24:24; 36:65; 41:20–22).


<<end of chunk>>
