<<chunk 722 part 1 of 0..1>>
lement, of Satan’s doing. So avoid it,
that haply you may prosper.ґ Satan desires only to sow enmity and hatred among you through
wine and gambling, and to turn you away from the remembrance of
God, and from prayer. Will you, then, refrain?90–91
This is the fourth and final passage in the chronological order of
revelation relating to intoxicating drinks, and it enjoins their ultimate and
complete prohibition. In 16:67, the image of fruits . . . from which you derive
strong drink is presented as a sign of God’s generous provision for human
beings. However, in 2:219 both wine and gambling are said to have some
benefit, but also great sin
. Then in 4:43 people are told to avoid prayer when in a
state of drunkenness. In the present verses wine and gambling are included,
along with idols and the pre-Islamic, pagan practice of using divining arrows to
allot food and other goods, as among those things that bring spiritual impurity
and should be completely avoided. Gambling translates maysir, a specific form
of gambling popular in pre-Islamic Arabia (see 2:219c), although the verse is
understood as applying to all forms of gambling, just as the prohibition on wine
in these verses is understood as a prohibition on all intoxicants.
That the prohibition of wine (
khamr
), which technically refers to wine made
from grapes, nonetheless extends to all intoxicating beverages was reportedly
explained by ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb in a sermon in which he said, “Wine (
khamr)
is that which clouds (
khāmara
) the intellect,” indicating that the prohibition
applies to any substance that, when consumed, clouds the mind (IK). Moreover,
the ban on intoxicating beverages includes not only their consumption, but also
their sale and any profit attained by it (IK).
Some considered the ban on gambling to extend to all games that squander
people’s time fruitlessly, such as chess and backgammon (IK), although these
latter were never banned in Islamic Law, and both have remained popular games
among Muslims to the present day. In this verse, idols (anṣāb
) is likely a
reference to the idolatrous practice of sacrificing animals on stone altars (nuṣub),
which is mentioned in v. 3 as a practice that made the meat unlawful to consume.
Some accounts report that the present verse was revealed after some of the
Prophet’s Companions became drunk and began to fight with one another until
one man was seriously injured (Ṭ). V. 91 thus indicates that wine and gambling
should be avoided, because they are a means through which Satan may cause
enmity and hatred among the believers and lead them to neglect remembrance of
God and prayer. Intracommunal enmity and hatred are said elsewhere to be the
fate of Christians (v. 14) and of Jews (v. 64) as a result of their forgetfulness or
disobedience.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:6:68 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 6:68-69 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
h And when thou seest those who engage in vain discussion about
Our signs, turn away from them till they engage in other discourse.
And if Satan should cause thee to forget, then once thou hast
remembered, sit not in the company of wrongdoing people.i Their reckoning falls not upon those who are reverent, but [upon
them is] a reminder, that they might be reverent.68–69
The disbelievers engage in vain discussion about the signs of God,
seeking to deny and deride them (Ṭ; cf. 4:140; 6:112). The Quran links such vain
discussion elsewhere with “playing” in a pejorative sense (see 6:32c; 6:91; 9:65;
43:83; 52:12; 70:42), since one should not take religion as mere play and
diversion (cf. 5:57; 6:70; 7:51). According to the Quran, vain discussion of any
sort should be avoided (23:3), and 24:14–16 indicates that vain discussion in
matters of religion and law can have serious consequences for the community, in
that it can lead, for example, to false accusations of adultery, which may then
give rise to serious miscarriages of justice and to mutual division and mistrust
among believers. This verse thus counsels the Prophet, and by extension all
believers, to avoid or remove themselves from groups engaged in vain
discussion about religious matters, an idea supported by other Quranic verses
(cf. 4:140; 6:91, 112; 7:180; 43:83; 70:42). Here, one need only turn away from
them until they move on to another topic (Z). The Quran similarly counsels those
who encounter such discussions: Say, “Allāh,” then leave them to play at their
vain discourse (v. 91).
Some reports connect the warning in this verse regarding those who engagein vain discussion about Our signs to the discordant factions mentioned in v. 65,
indicating that the warning pertains not only to the disbelievers, but even to
those believers who would engage in fruitless and divisive debate about religion(Ṭ). Some literalists have taken this verse to mean a prohibition against all
discussion and debate regarding religious issues, and thus as an indication that
one should rely only on a literal reading of the scripture. But al-Rāzī rejects such
an interpretation, indicating that the verb for “engaging in vain discussion”(
yakhūḍū) means precisely to engage in discussion that is disrespectful and
disparaging, and the warning thus does not pertain to sincere religious
deliberation, which is encouraged in the Quran.
Addressing the Prophet specifically, but all believers as well, the verse
indicates that Satan may cause people to forget the prohibition against sitting
among those engaged in vain discussion of religion or perhaps make them
unaware initially that the conversation has changed to a disparaging one, but as
soon as they become aware of it, they should remove themselves from the
discussion. Elsewhere in the Quran (cf. 12:42; 58:19), it is said that Satan causes
people to forget but that he is capable of causing the Prophet to forget raises
some difficult issues (Āl), although other verses in the Quran suggest that even
the prophets can be the object of Satan’s whisperings; see 22:52: And no
messenger or prophet did We send before thee, but that when he had a longing,
Satan would cast into his longing, whereupon God effaces what Satan cast.
The reckoning of the disbelievers and those who engage in vain discussion
about the signs of God will not fall upon those who are reverent, that is, those
who fear God and are observant of His commands and prohibitions. Even if they
temporarily find themselves among those engaged in such activity, they need not
fear being judged by association, for none bears the burden of another (see
6:52c). But it is incumbent upon the believers to deliver a reminder to those
engaged in such discourse; that is, believers should not only leave them, but also
show their displeasure with and opposition to the discussion and exhort them
against it (Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:6:95 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 6:95 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ҕ Truly God is the Cleaver of the grain and the fruit stone. He brings
forth the living from the dead, and He is the One Who brings forth the
dead from the living. That is God—how, then, are you perverted—95
That God is the Cleaver of the grain and the fruit stone is connected to
His bringing forth the living from the dead in that splitting open the grain and
fruit stone causes life to come forth from what is (or seems to be) dead (Ṭ). The
connection between “cleaving” or “splitting” and creating is also made
semantically in the Divine Name al-Fāṭir, “the Originator,” which is derived
from the root meaning “to split” (for the mention of this Divine Name, which is
also the title of Sūrah 35, see 6:14; 12:101; 14:10; 35:1; 39:46; 42:11, where it
always occurs in the context of the phrase Originator of the heavens and the
earth
). He brings forth the living from the dead both when He creates human
beings the first time and when He brings them forth through resurrection after
death. He brings forth the dead from the living when He causes death, or the end
of their earthly existence; see also 3:27; 10:31; 30:19. In this context it is
important to recall the two Divine Names Muḥyī (Giver of Life; 30:50; 41:39)
and Mumīt (Bringer of Death). The living coming forth from the dead and the
dead from the living can refer not only to the individual human being, who is
given life and then dies, but also to the complementary movements of creation
and resurrection, referred to in Islamic discourse as mabdaʾ (origin) and maʿād
(return), by which human souls, and indeed all beings, are transported between
this world and the next (see 10:4c). An analogous cycle of death and life is also
seen in various ways in the created order, for example, when the apparently“dead” seed comes forth from the living plant and the living plant from the“dead” seed (R, Ṭ).


<<end of chunk>>
