<<chunk 722 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:4:43 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 4:43 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
C O you who believe! Draw not near unto prayer when you are
drunken until you know what you are uttering, nor in a state of ritual
impurity—unless you are passing through—until you have washed.
But if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you has come from
satisfying a call of nature, or you have touched women, and you find
no water, then resort to clean earth, and wipe your faces and your
hands. Truly God is Pardoning, Forgiving.43
In Islamic Law, drinking alcohol or ingesting any intoxicating substance
is forbidden. However, four verses address the consumption of wine or
intoxicating drinks, and only one of them bans wine explicitly. The earliest of the
four, 16:67, refers to the “strong drink” that people derive from the fruit of the
vine as a sign of God’s merciful provision for human beings and contains no
indication of wine’s harmful properties. In 2:219 it says that in drinking wine
and gambling there is great sin, but [some] benefits
. The present verse can be
seen as a gloss on this, instructing Muslims to avoid drunkenness at the times of
prayer. Finally, 5:90 instructs Muslims to avoid wine and gambling entirely, as
they are of Satan’s doing
. Although only this last verse amounts to an absolute
prohibition against the consumption of alcoholic drink, Islamic jurisprudence,
basing itself upon Prophetic sayings (aḥādīth
) and practice (
Sunnah
), has
consistently viewed this last revealed verse as the authoritative one that
abrogates the legal implications of the other three.
In the present verse, believers are asked to draw not near unto prayer in a
state of drunkenness, that is, not to approach the prayer itself or the mosque(ṣalāh/ṣalawāt, or “prayer(s),” can also connote the place of prayer; cf. 22:40), or
prepare themselves for prayer until they are sober and know what they are
reciting. This part of the verse was reportedly revealed when some Companions
of the Prophet attempted to pray after having drunk wine (when it was still
permissible) and incorrectly recited a Quranic passage during the prayer (W, Z).
After this verse was revealed, Muslims would drink wine only after they had
completed the evening prayer (ʿishāʾ), and they continued this practice until
wine was forbidden (Q). A minority tradition extends the meaning of“drunkenness” (
sukārā) to include excessive sleepiness that would similarly
impair one’s ability to pray properly. Such an interpretation would mean that the
verse was not entirely abrogated by the later prohibition against drinking wine
(Q, Ṭ).
Ritual impurity translates junub, which denotes major ritual impurity and
derives from a root meaning to be distant from something; in this case, one
should keep oneself distant from prayer—and places of prayer—until one has
properly purified oneself, just as one should avoid these when intoxicated.
According to legal scholars, the state of junub also prohibits one from touching
or reciting the Quran. Until you have washed refers to completing the major
ritual ablution, which requires full immersion (as in a bath or shower). An
exception is made for those passing through, that is, travelers in a state of junub
who need to seek shelter temporarily in a mosque, or those Companions of the
Prophet who needed to pass through the mosque to go out of their homes,
because their homes were adjacent to the mosque in Madinah (Q).
This verse also establishes an important easing of the rules of ritual purity by
allowing the substitution of clean earth for water in circumstances where one is
ill (and so unable to look for water or in fear that washing with water will
increase one’s illness) or on a journey and unable to find water (see also 5:6 for a
nearly identical set of injunctions related to purity). This part of the verse was
reportedly revealed when the Prophet’s wife ʿĀʾishah lost a necklace while
journeying with the Prophet and a group of Muslims. The Prophet ordered the
group to make camp at the site, so that people could look for the lost necklace.
There was no water at the site, and people began to complain that they were
unable to wash for prayers. When the time for the dawn prayer came, this verse
was revealed allowing ritual purification with clean earth (W).
This way of performing the ritual ablution came to be known as tayammum,
from the verb tayammamū (
resort to
), employed in this verse, and is most
commonly performed using a clean piece of rock. A ḥadīth refers to the
tayammum when it lists God’s having made dust (
turāb
) purifying for the
Muslims as one of the blessings with which God favored Muslims over other
peoples (Q). The term used for earth (ṣaʿīd
) in clean earth may denote high,
hard, or rocky ground. However, the term for clean (
tayyib
) may also mean“good,” “pure,” or “wholesome,” so some suggest that it refers to arable soil (Q).
Al-Ṭabarī asserts that it refers to any pure or clean part of the surface of the
earth. In either case, the dust (
turāb
) that attaches to one’s hands when striking
the “earth” is the purifying substance, as is made clear in the ḥadīth above.
Precious metals and gems are not suitable as sources of clean earth for the
tayammum.
There are differences among the legal schools as to whether the absence of
water is a condition for the acceptability of the tayammum; how extensively one
has to search for water; how ill one has to be before resorting to the tayammum;
whether the tayammum removes the impurity or merely makes it temporarily
acceptable for a Muslim to pray; and whether the prayer has to be repeated if
water is found before the prescribed time of the prayer has elapsed (Q). They
also disagree about the extent to which one would have to “touch women” in
order to become impure. Some argue that this refers only to sexual intercourse,
while others claim it means touching of any kind, regardless of whether the
touching excited sexual desire (Q). Legal instructions for the tayammum require
one to make the niyyah or intention to perform the tayammum then to touch the
earth or rub a piece of stone twice, once to wipe the face and again to wipe the
hands.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:4:49 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 4:49-50 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
I Hast thou not seen those who deem themselves pure? Rather, it is
God Who purifies whomsoever He will, and they shall not be
wronged so much as the thread of a date stone.P See how they fabricate lies against God! That suffices as a
manifest sin.49–50
These verses continue the criticism of the Madinan Jews (Q) or
more likely of the People of the Book in general (Z) who deem themselves pure.
Most commentators see this as a reference to spiritual assertions the Jews or the
People of the Book are said to make elsewhere in the Quran, particularly their
declaration that they are the children and the beloved of God (5:18) and that they
have an exclusive claim on Paradise (2:111; Q, Ṭ, Z). Some say that it refers to a
group of Madinan Jews who approached the Prophet, claiming that they were
free of sin, that what they did during the day was forgiven at night (Q, Ṭ, W, Z),
or that they could absolve one another of their sins through intercession (Q, Ṭ),
although the Quran does not attest to any such claims being made explicitly by
the People of the Book. The Quran warns people in general not to consider
themselves pure (53:32). God alone knows those who are truly pure and those
who are not.
They shall not be wronged so much as the thread of a date stone indicates
that God does not treat people unjustly even in the slightest way (cf. 4:77, 124;
17:71; 19:60). The thread of a date stone renders fatīl, which might also mean
the bit of soil that one can find by scraping between one’s fingers; in either case,
it is a common Quranic metaphor for insignificance.
Such assertions of purity and sinlessness are said in v. 50 to be lies against
God, a sin in itself. The claim of purity for one’s soul is unacceptable in Islam.
Even the falsely accused prophet Joseph asserted, when the treachery of his
would-be seductress was revealed, But I absolve not my own soul. Surely the
soul commands to evil (12:53). Claims of purity for oneself were particularly
odious to the Sufis, who warned that the carnal soul (
nafs
) was not the locus of
purity in the human being, that being pleased with one’s own soul extinguished
the lights of certitude (Su) and was the source of disobedience and heedlessness
(Aj), and that anyone who was persuaded by others’ high opinions of their purity
or by their own high estimation of themselves was veiled in ignorance (Qu).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:4:56 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 4:56 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
V Those who disbelieve in Our signs, We shall surely cause them to
burn in a Fire. As often as their skins are consumed, We shall replace
them with other skins, that they may taste the punishment. Truly God
is Mighty, Wise.56
The image of the skins of those in Hell being consumed (naḍijat, lit.“roasted”) repeatedly and indefinitely, conveys the unending nature of the
punishment. This is also among a number of verses that are understood by some
commentators as suggesting that the pleasures and torments of the Afterlife as
described in the Quran are meant to be taken literally rather than as metaphors
for spiritual reward and punishment. Others say that skins refers to the garments
made of pitch (14:50) that those in Hell will wear (Ṭ, Q) These are replaced as
they are burned up, so that the condemned can be set alight again and again. The
constant renewal of their skins has also been understood as indicating a
continuous change in the attributes of those in Hell without any change in their
essence.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:5:90 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 5:90-91 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ґ O you who believe! Wine, and gambling, and idols, and divining
arrows are but a means of defi
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
