<<chunk 723 part 1 of 0..1>>
gest that the jinn “possessed” these human beings in the sense of
controlling their will, but rather that the jinn merely called or tempted them
toward wrongdoing, and that many responded (R). See 14:22, where Satan says
to those who followed him, I had no authority over you, save that I called you,
and you responded to me. The term . . . appointed for us here, as elsewhere, may
refer to the onset of the Day of Judgment (R) or simply to the end of their earthly
lives (R, Ṭ). The jinn and the human beings they claimed profited from each
other: human beings profited from the false assurances they received by calling
upon the jinn for protection against harm (see 72:6), and the jinn profited from
this arrangement insofar as it attributed to them a greatness, power, and authority
they did not actually possess (R, Ṭ). The verse concludes with the judgment that
the Fire is to be their abode (here mathwā, instead of dār, as in v. 127). In v. 129,
We make the wrongdoers allies of one another may mean that God makes human
wrongdoers supporters of each other in this life, that He will make them follow
one another into Hellfire, or that some wrongdoers are given authority over
others (Ṭ)—all meanings within the semantic range of the verb nuwallī.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:6:146 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 6:146 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ņ And unto those who are Jews, We forbade every animal with
claws; and of oxen and sheep We forbade them the fat thereof, save
that upon their backs or their entrails or that which is mingled with
bone. Thus did We recompense them for their willful disobedience,
and surely We are truthful.
146
After the criticisms of the arbitrary restrictions on eating meat
observed by the Makkan idolaters (vv. 136, 138–39, 143–44) and the listing of
the four prohibitions related to the consumption of meat revealed to the Prophet
(v. 145), this verse mentions some additional dietary prohibitions imposed by
God upon the Jews as a recompense . . . for their willful disobedience
. That God
forbade them every animal with claws (
dhī ẓufur
) suggests that they are
forbidden all carnivorous beasts (which also became part of Islamic dietary law
on the basis of Prophetic Sunnah
). They are further forbidden the fat of oxen and
sheep, except for that upon their backs or intermingled with other tissue. Some
legal scholars, including the founders of two of the four major schools of Sunni
Law, Abū Ḥanīfah and al-Shāfiʿī, held that this prohibition on fat did not pertain
to Muslims, citing a report that the Prophet did not forbid one of his followers
from eating it during the siege of Khaybar (Q), during which he established other
dietary prohibitions on eating beasts and birds of prey as well as donkeys.
The specific dietary prohibitions mentioned for the Jews in the present verse
are largely consistent with the extensive dietary prohibitions found in Leviticus 3
and 11, as well as Deuteronomy 14, although they are not identical. For example,
in Leviticus 11, the Israelites are forbidden “all that walk on their paws” (v. 27)
and several different birds of prey, but also animals with undivided hooves, such
as camels—although many Quranic commentators consider dhī ẓufur (here
translated with claws
) to mean “with undivided toes” (JJ, Q, Ṭ), In Leviticus
3:9–10, the Israelites are instructed to remove the fat from the backbone and the
entrails to be burned as a sacrifice. The Quran here suggests that such dietary
prohibitions, which are more complex and restrictive than what is found in
Islamic dietary law, were a recompense for their willful disobedience, which
some gloss as their mistreatment of the needy among themselves (Ṭb) or simply
their “wrongdoing” (Z). Cf. 3:93: All food was lawful unto the Children of
Israel, save what Israel had forbidden for himself, before the Torah was sent
down, indicates that there were no Divinely imposed dietary prohibitions on the
Israelites prior to the revelation of the Torah.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:164 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:164 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ť And when a community among them said, “Why do you admonish
a people whom God is about to destroy or punish with a severe
punishment?” They said, “As an excuse before your Lord, and that
haply they may be reverent.”164
A community among them refers to those Israelites in the town who did
not participate in fishing on the Sabbath, but also did not admonish those who
did (R, Ṭ). Here this group addresses those who tried actively to forbid or
discourage those fishing on the Sabbath, asking why they make the effort to
admonish a people whom God is about to destroy or punish
. Their response is
that it serves as an excuse before God, meaning that they consider themselves to
be obligated to “forbid wrong,” and having done so, they have fulfilled their
moral duty (IK, Ṭ). And that haply they may be reverent indicates that the
admonishers also hoped that their warnings might succeed in bringing the
Sabbath violators back to reverence for God and for Mosaic Law.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:165 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:165 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ť And when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We
saved those who forbade evil, and We seized those who did wrong
with a dreadful punishment for their having committed iniquity.
165
When those who were violating the Sabbath forgot that whereof they
had been reminded by those who admonished them, God punished the violators
and saved those who forbade evil—that is, by exhorting their fellow Israelites to
observe the Sabbath. The commentators are divided on the fate of those who
abstained both from fishing on the Sabbath and from forbidding others to do so
(Mw, R); some consider them to be among the saved (Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:169 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:169 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ũ Then a generation succeeded them who inherited the Book. They
grasp the ephemeralities of this lower world and say, “It will be
forgiven us.” And if other ephemeralities like them were to come their
way, they would grasp them [also]. Did not the covenant of the Book
commit them to say naught of God save the truth? They have studied
what is in it. And the Abode of the Hereafter is better for those who
are reverent. Will you not understand?
169
The generation who succeeded the followers of Moses is understood
by commentators to refer to some later Jews, and Jewish religious leaders in
particular, who brought about a certain corruption in the teachings and Law of
Moses by allowing some commands and prohibitions to be neglected (R, Ṭ, Z).
Some commentators suggest that certain Jewish leaders took bribery in exchange
for easing the requirements of the law for certain people (R, Ṭ, Z). See also
19:59, regarding the descendants of Abraham and Israel: Then they were
succeeded by a generation who neglected prayer and followed base desires
. The
corrupt among this later generation grasp the ephemeralities of this lower world,
meaning that they take whatever they desire of fleeting, worldly things, whether
they are lawful or unlawful, or even sinful, and assume they will be forgiven for
it. Other Quranic passages suggest that certain Jews were overly confident about
God’s leniency in judgment toward them; see 2:80 and 3:24, where they claim,
the Fire will not touch us save for days numbered
. Yet if other ephemeralities
come to them, they grasp those as well, indicating that they are not truly
repentant, and that their intention is to persist in their acts of disobedience.
The covenant of the Book refers to the covenantal obligations imposed on the
Jews by the Torah, one of which was to speak only truthfully about God in
accordance with what is taught in the scripture, including that God’s forgiveness
is only for those who are truly repentant and mend their ways, not for those who
persist in their errors (Z). For Quranic statements about this see, for example,
16:119: Then truly thy Lord—for those who commit evil in ignorance, then later
repent and make amends—truly thy Lord thereafter is Forgiving, Merciful
. That
for the reverent the Hereafter is better than this world is also mentioned in 4:77
and 6:32.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:170 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:170 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ű As for those who cling to the Book and perform the prayer—surely
We neglect not the reward of the workers of righteousness.
170
Those who cling to the Book means those who continue to adhere to
the teachings, commands, and prohibitions established in the Torah (Q, Ṭ). That
God does not neglect . . . the reward of those who are righteous means that He
will not fail to reward them for their deeds (cf. 3:171; 9:120; 11:115; 12:56, 90;
18:30). This verse indicates that those who are Jews and continue to follow the
Torah and Mosaic Law will be rewarded for their good deeds; see also 2:62,
which states that Jews, Sabeans, and Christians who believe and “work
righteousness” shall have their reward with their Lord (cf. 5:69).


<<end of chunk>>
