<<chunk 724 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:201 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:201 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ȁ Truly those who are reverent, when they are touched by a visitation
from Satan, they remember; then behold, they see.
201
To be touched by a visitation from Satan means to be tempted by him,
perhaps in a dream or apparition, which is the lexical meaning of ṭāʾif (Z),
translated here as “visitation.” Some consider a visitation from Satan to refer
here to the impulse toward anger (Ṭ) or to any Satanic insinuation
(“whispering”; see 114:4c) that tempts one toward a moral or intellectual lapse(Ṭ). The reverent, when faced with such a Satanic visitation or temptation of this
kind, remember—that is, they remember God, and in particular they remember
the commands of God and the threat of His punishment—and so return to
obedience (Ṭ). Remember translates tadhakkarū, which can also mean to“reflect” or “take heed.” After remembering, the reverent again see, meaning
that they are restored to sound judgment and guidance (Ṭs) and return to what is
right and what God has commanded (Ṭ). According to al-Zamakhsharī“remembering” God in this way whenever one is tempted is the regular habit of
the reverent.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:204 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:204 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ȅ And when the Quran is recited, hearken unto it, and listen, that
haply you may receive mercy.
204
The command to both hearken unto and listen to the Quran, employing
two words that are nearly synonyms, serves to emphasize the care with which
one should listen to the sacred sound of the recited Quran, paying full attention
in order to understand its meaning as well as reflecting upon its teachings (Aj, Ṭ)
and acting according to its prescriptions (Q, Z). Listen translates anṣitū, which
connotes listening silently, and which some indicate was particularly important
when the Prophet was reciting the Quran (Q). This injunction also has specific
importance for the etiquette of communal prayer, requiring all those praying
behind the imam to be silent and listen attentively to the Quranic passages that
the imam recites, neither engaging in conversation with fellow worshippers nor
uttering the recitations themselves (Aj, Ṭ, Ṭs, Z). Some commentators assert that
the command to listen attentively to the recited Quran applies to any context in
which one hears it (Aj, Q, Z). Listening silently and with pure receptivity to the
recited Quran is considered by some as a means of developing the quality of
pure servitude toward God (Su) or of coming into the Presence of God, who is
the ultimate “Speaker” behind the recited words (Aj). Since the Quran is
described in v. 203 as a mercy, one should hearken to its recited words so one
may receive mercy
. Ibn ʿAjībah states that “mercy is the closest thing to the one
listening to the Quran.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:7:205 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 7:205 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ȅ And remember thy Lord within thy soul, humbly and in awe, being
not loud of voice, in the morning and the evening, and be not among
those who are heedless.
205
The command to remember thy Lord is addressed to the Prophet, but
applies to all people (R). It likely refers to both the invocation (
dhikr
) of God
with the tongue and the remembrance (
dhikr
) of God in the heart—the latter
indicated by the call to remember God within thy soul
. This “remembrance” may
also take the form of reciting the Quran or uttering words of praise and
glorification for God as well as the testament to His Oneness (Z). Read in
connection with the previous verse, remember thy Lord may be an injunction to
remember God when one hears the Quran being recited (Ṭ). To remember God
within thy soul may also mean to remember Him “within thyself,” and al-Ṭabarīconnects this verse with a famous ḥadīth qudsī (sacred ḥadīth
), “When My
servant remembers Me in himself, I remember him in Myself; when he
remembers Me in solitude, I remember him in solitude; when he remembers Me
in an assembly, I remember him in an assembly that is nobler” (Ṭ). The present
verse is one of the most important in suggesting the spiritual importance of dhikr
(remembrance or invocation), encouraged, particularly by Sufis, as a means of
attaining an “unveiling” by which one arrives at a more profound understanding
of God (R) and realizes that God is ever near and witness to one’s thoughts and
deeds (ST) and indeed as a means of experiencing His Presence and one’s
immersion “in the ocean of Divinity.” According to a ḥadīth, “All that is on the
earth is accursed save the remembrance of God.” Concerning dhikr, see also
13:28c; 29:45c; 33:41c.
The command to remember God humbly and in awe, being not loud of voice,
is similar to the command to call upon Him humbly and in secret (6:63; 7:55)
and can be understood as directions for the performance of dhikr in Sufism.
Lowering one’s voice is also enjoined during supplicatory prayer (17:110), when
speaking in the presence of the Prophet (49:2–3), and as part of one’s general
comportment, for the vilest of voices are those of asses (31:19). To pray quietly
reflects sincerity in one’s prayer (Aj, R, Z), indicating that one is not praying to
be seen of men (4:142), and is best suited to facilitating reflection and
recollection (Z). The Prophet was once asked by some Companions whether God
was near, so that they should whisper to Him, or far away, so that they should
shout, after which 2:186 was then revealed, When My servants ask thee about
Me, truly I am near. I answer the call of the caller when he calls Me (IK).
Al-Rāzī explains that the invocation or remembrance enjoined here should be
done not silently, but in a voice low enough that it can be heard only by oneself,
since there is a profound connection between the body, soul, and spirit—each of
which is a door to the others—a connection that is activated by the process of
remembering or invoking God. Hearing the invocation uttered by the bodily
tongue moves the imagination and soul of the one invoking, which in turn
strengthens the remembrance in the spiritual heart. The act of remembrance thus
takes place simultaneously on all three levels, each reflecting upon and
strengthening the others. Because of the injunction to remember God quietly,
some might consider this verse as prohibiting the loud, communal dhikr
practiced by Sufi groups. Ibn ʿAjībah, however, rejects this interpretation, noting
that this verse was revealed in Makkah, when the believers had to be
circumspect in their worship, and that when the community migrated to
Madinah, the Prophet and Companions would conduct public dhikr sessions in
the mosque.
The morning and the evening are mentioned here and elsewhere as times
particularly suited to remembering, supplicating, or praising God (see 3:41; 6:52;
18:28; 19:11; 24:36; 33:41–42; 48:9; 76:25). These two times of day may also
be mentioned as a way of saying that one should remember and praise God at all
times (Aj, Z). These two times, marking the beginning and end of the day, are
mentioned specifically because of the spiritual symbolism they entail—each
being a time of transition between light and darkness, sleeping and waking, and
thus suggestive of death and resurrection (Aj, R).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:8:24 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 8:24 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
$ O you who believe! Respond to God and the Messenger when he
calls you unto that which will give you life. And know that God
comes between a man and his heart, and that unto Him shall you be
gathered.24
That which will give you life is the truth, or the Quran itself (Ṭ),
meaning something that gives life to the heart (Q) or that bears the commands
and prohibitions that will lead to the mode of everlasting life in the Hereafter
(Q). This verse could also mean that one should respond to the call to fighting in
the way of God, since death in the way of God would lead to everlasting felicity
(Q).
That God comes between a man and his heart is interpreted to mean that He
comes between a disbeliever and faith, or between a believer and disbelief (Ṭ),
or that nothing is hidden from God, even the innermost dimensions of one’s
being (Ṭ). In this sense it resembles the statement in 50:16: We are nearer to him
than his jugular vein
. It can also mean that God has the power to change hearts,
as when He changed the fear in the hearts of the participants of the Battle of
Badr into a sense of security (Q; see v. 11). The notion of being gathered unto
God is mentioned throughout the Quran (e.g., 2:203; 3:158; 5:96; 6:38; 23:79;
58:9; 67:24) and is related to the idea, also often mentioned in the Quran, of all
things being returned to God (e.g., 2:210; 3:109; 8:44).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:8:42 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 8:42 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
B when you were on the near slope and they were on the far slope,
and the caravan was below you. And had you made a tryst with each
other, you would have failed the tryst. But [it came to pass] so that
God may conclude a matter that was to be done, so that whosoever
should perish, perishes according to a clear proof, and whosoever
should live, lives according to a clear proof. And truly God is
Hearing, Knowing.42
Near slope . . . far slope . . . caravan below: the two armies were on two
sides of a valley with the caravan of Abū Sufyān below them in the direction of
the sea (R). You would have failed the tryst means that the Muslims would not
have agreed to go out to meet such a superior army in battle if they had prior
knowledge of it (Q); for more detail on the events leading up to the battle, see
8:5c.To live or perish according to a clear proof echoes the separation of the bad
from the good in v. 37 and the idea that the Battle of Badr was a Day of
Discrimination between one side and the other, in that the good and the bad, the
true and the false, were put to the test and made manifest through the Bat
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
