<<chunk 725 part 1 of 0..1>>
rse to indicate that the title “Creator,”and thus the act of creation, can only be rightfully attributed to God. Thus human
beings cannot be said to be the “creators” of their own acts; rather, all acts, like
all things, are created by God (R). Some Muʿtazilites responded by saying that
the verse does not deny that the act of “creating,” in a limited sense, can also be
attributed to human beings; rather, the point of the verse is that human beings,
who possess intelligence and agency and thus have at least some capability for“creating,” should not worship idols that do not possess even these limited
faculties or capabilities and thus can create nothing at all (R).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:16:20 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 16:20 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ȋ And those whom they call upon apart from God create naught, and
are themselves created.20
Cf. 25:3. That the idols are “created” presents an additional contrast
with God, Who is “uncreated” and therefore not “created” by another. See
37:95–96: He said, “Do you worship that which you carve, while God created
you and that which you make?”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:16:95 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 16:95-96 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ҕ Sell not the pact of God for a paltry price. Surely that which is with
God is better for you, if you but knew.Җ That which is with you comes to an end, but that which is with
God subsists. And surely We shall render unto those who are patient
their reward for the best of that which they used to do.95–96
See 3:77, where people are warned not to sell God’s Pact and their
oaths for a paltry price, as well as 3:187, where some of the People of the Book
are criticized for selling their covenant with God for a paltry price
. Selling
spiritually valuable realities for a paltry price is a common metaphor in the
Quran, and other verses warn against selling God’s signs for a paltry price (2:41;
3:199; 5:44). To “sell” God’s pact and His signs for a paltry price is understood
to mean trading the guidance, protection, and spiritual felicity they offer for the
ephemeral goods of this world (R, Z), such as material wealth, power, and status.
That which is with God is better, because it subsists (see also 20:131; 28:60;
42:36), while that which is with you in this world comes to an end
. Patience is
considered an integral element of piety (2:177; 33:35), a virtue that brings great
spiritual reward, for God is with the patient (2:153, 249; 8:46) and loves the
patient (3:146); and the patient are rewarded bounteously in the Hereafter (see
25:75; 28:54; 39:10). The Quranic model for patience is Jacob, who patiently
bore the absence of his beloved son Joseph (see 12:18, 83–86); and in the
Quranic story of Jacob and Joseph, the importance of patience is repeatedly and
explicitly emphasized (and rewarded). The patience of Job, often mentioned in
the Judeo-Christian tradition, is also implied in the Quran through the mention of
Job’s enduring great affliction with faith (21:83–84; 38:41–44); and Job, like
several other Quranic prophets, is described as steadfast, or “patient” (ṣābir;
38:44).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:2 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:2 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
* We did not send down the Quran unto thee that thou shouldst be
distressed,2
The Quran was not given to the Prophet to cause him to be distressed
over its acceptance or rejection by his people, or their belief or disbelief in his
message (Q; see 15:88; 18:6; 26:3). Thus this verse relates to the wider Quranic
theme of God’s addressing the prophets’ human reactions to the trials they
encountered when rejected by their people (see 2:214; 11:36; 15:97–99;
21:83–84; 26:3). According to another interpretation, the Prophet had been
praying all night to the point that his legs had become swollen; so this verse was
revealed, conveying that the Quran was not sent to cause him to weaken and
exhaust himself in acts of worship, thereby causing undue hardship upon himself
(Q).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:3 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:3-4 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
+ but only as a reminder unto one who fears [God],
J a revelation from He, Who created the earth and the high heavens.3–4
But in v. 3 can mean “however,” which would indicate that v. 3 does
not directly follow upon v. 2, as it would then read, “However, it is only a
reminder unto one who fears [God]” (R). If it is directly connected to v. 2, then
v. 3 can mean that the Quran was not revealed to the Prophet in order to cause
him hardship, but rather was sent down only as a reminder unto one who fears
[God] (R). In either case, one who fears refers to those who reverence God(
muttaqīn
), as in 2:2: This is the Book in which there is no doubt, a guidance for
the reverent (R). Elsewhere, “Reminder” is considered one of the names of the
Quran; see 3:58; 21:2, 7, 10, 24 (cf. 38:1).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:7 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:7 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
z And if thou speakest aloud, verily He knows what is secret and
what is more hidden still.7
What is secret refers to hidden talk (Kl), and what is more hidden still
refers to what lies deeply hidden in the soul and is only known to God (Kl, My,
Qu). According to a common Sufi psychological teaching, the secret (
sirr)
corresponds to the heart, which is the locus of one’s consciousness of God, while
what is more hidden still (
akhfā) corresponds to a deeper dimension of the same
reality. Al-Rāzī deduces from the second part of this verse that if God knows the
innermost recesses of a person’s thoughts, then, a fortiori, He also knows whathe speakest aloud
. Taken together, vv. 6–7 are in part similar to 2:284: Unto God
belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. And
whether you disclose what is in your souls or hide it, God will bring you to
account for it; see also 2:255; 6:3; 13:10; 21:110.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:14 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:14 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ŋ Truly I am God, there is no god but I. So worship Me, and perform
the prayer for the remembrance of Me.14
See also 3:18, where God testifies to His own Divinity: God bears
witness that there is no god but He
. In the present verse, perform the prayer for
the remembrance of Me is said to refer to the act of remembering God much in
the prayer (Bq). A deeper dimension of this act of remembering God is, as
explained by the Sufi Rūzbihān al-Baqlī, for the servant to be the dhikr through
which he becomes “drowned in the oceans of witnessing the One Who is
Remembered (
al-madhkūr
), because the prayer is the place for witnessing
secrets by means of lights (
al-anwār
), [and the place] for the disclosure of
beauty (
al-jamāl
) to spirits by virtue of their ascent.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:17 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:17-18 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ź And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses?”Ɗ He said, “It is my staff. I lean upon it and beat down leaves for my
sheep. And I have other uses for it.”17–18
God’s question to Moses is a rhetorical one intended to draw his
attention to the staff so that when it becomes a serpent, Moses will know in a
direct manner that it was the result of a great miracle (Bg). Al-Rāzī explains it
this way: “It is as if God said, ‘O Moses, do you know the reality of that which is
in your hand, that it is a piece of wood which can neither harm nor benefit, but
which will then turn into a mighty serpent?’”In traditional Islamic lore, the staff of Moses is said to have belonged
initially to Adam and was made from a pillar in Heaven; it was then transmitted
from prophet to prophet until it ended up with the prophet Shuʿayb, who then
gave it to Moses when he married Shuʿayb’s daughter (ST); see also 7:106–8c.
According to al-Tustarī, although Moses’ words I have other uses for it will
become true in the future because God will soon make it the means by which
Moses performs several major miracles, at this point Moses is unaware of the
future function of the staff. This, al-Tustarī says, was God’s way of showing to
Moses that even though he was to be a prophet, what even someone like him
knows is ultimately very little in comparison to what God knows. See also
27:10; 28:31; cf. Exodus 4:2.


<<end of chunk>>
