<<chunk 725 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:14:36 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 14:36 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ö My Lord! Surely they have led astray many among mankind. So
whosoever follows me, he is of me. And whosoever disobeys me,
surely Thou art Forgiving, Merciful.36
Surely they have led astray many among mankind is a figurative
expression used to indicate the manner in which people have been misguided in
their service to lifeless idols (Q); see also 71:24. So whosoever follows me, he is
of me; that is, whoever follows Abraham in believing in God’s Oneness belongs
to his monotheistic creed (Q). And whosoever disobeys me, surely Thou art
Forgiving, Merciful refers to the teaching that any sin will be forgiven by God
except for the ascription of partners unto Him (Bg, IJ, Q), as in 4:48: Truly God
forgives not that any partner be ascribed unto Him, but He forgives what is less
than that for whomsoever He will, for whosoever ascribes partners unto God has
surely fabricated a tremendous sin (see also v. 10c; 4:48c, 116). Alternately, this
part of the verse can also include the sin of ascribing partners unto God, which,
according to some commentators, would then pertain to the time before God
informed Abraham that He does not forgive people for ascribing partners unto
Him (Bg, IJ, Q).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:14:37 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 14:37 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
× Our Lord! Verily I have settled some of my progeny in a valley
without cultivation by Thy Sacred House, our Lord, that they might
perform the prayer. So cause the hearts of some men to incline toward
them, and provide them with fruits, that haply they may give thanks.37
Some of my progeny can be a reference to Abraham’s son Ishmael (Kl)
or to Ishmael and his mother, Hagar (Q). A valley without cultivation is a
reference to Makkah (Kl), and Thy Sacred House is the Kaʿbah. Prayer here is
said to denote “religion” in its entirety, in light of prayer’s superior rank in
religion (Q). That they might perform the prayer would therefore mean
something like “so that they may uphold religion” (see also 42:13).
Although Makkah did not have date trees, Abraham’s prayer to God to
provide Hagar and Ishmael with fruits was answered, since fruits came to
Makkah from many outlying regions (IK). According to some commentators,
Abraham’s prayer was answered by the bestowal of abundant date palms upon
the town of Ṭāʾif (JJ), a neighboring region that had a great deal of historical and
commercial contact with Makkah.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:14:38 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 14:38 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ø Our Lord! Surely Thou knowest what we hide and what we
disclose. And naught is hidden from God, on earth or in Heaven.38
Surely Thou knowest what we hide and what we disclose (see also 3:29)
means that God knows more about what will benefit human beings than they do
themselves, and He is more merciful to them than they are to themselves (Bḍ).
Despite this fact, human beings must still beseech God, so that they may
manifest their state of servanthood to Him and their need for His Mercy, and
because it hastens the Divine Response to their needs (Bḍ).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:14:40 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 14:40 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
@ My Lord! Make me a performer of prayer, and my progeny. Our
Lord! Accept my supplication!40
A performer of prayer can refer to one who is firm in religion (Q) or to
one who is persistent in the actual act of prayer (Bḍ). Our Lord! Accept my
supplication! may be a request on the part of Abraham that God accept his
worship in general or his supplication as mentioned in this verse in particular(Bḍ).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:14:44 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 14:44 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
D And warn mankind of the Day when the punishment shall come
upon them, whereupon those who did wrong will say, “Our Lord!
Grant us reprieve for a term nigh, that we might respond to Thy Call
and follow the messengers.” [It will be said unto them], “Did you not
earlier swear that there would be no end for you?”44
The reference here is to the Day of Judgment (Bg, Kl, Q). According to
Ibn ʿAbbās, by mankind is meant the Makkan idolaters specifically (Q). The
period of reprieve they will ask for when they see the punishment—that is, when
the truth is made manifest to them in the Hereafter (Q)—is also mentioned in
6:27–28: If thou couldst see when they are arraigned before the Fire, whereupon
they will say, “Would that we were sent back! Then we would not deny the signs
of our Lord, but we would be among the believers!” Nay, but it has now become
clear to them what they used to hide; cf. 32:12; 40:49–50. Yet this is a futile
request, since 6:28 maintains that even if they were returned to their life on earth
to mend their ways, they would return to the very thing they had been forbidden.
Truly they are liars; see also 6:27–28c.
The end that the Makkan idolaters swore would not come to them is their
going from the life of this world to the Hereafter and the punishment in the
Hereafter itself (Q). Many commentators connect the last part of this verse, Did
you not earlier swear that there would be no end for you? with the Makkan
idolaters’ statement mentioned at 16:38: And they swear by God their most
solemn oaths [that] God will not resurrect those who die (Bḍ, IK, Q, Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:15:6 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 15:6 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
j And they say, “O you unto whom the Reminder has been sent
down, truly you are possessed.6
The Reminder here refers to the Quran (JJ; see also v. 9; 7:2c; 16:44;
20:3; 36:11), whereas elsewhere in the Quran the Reminder can also refer to the
scriptures preceding the Quran (16:43; 21:2, 7; 40:53). It is reported that the
Makkan idolaters heard the Prophet say, “Verily God (Most High) has sent down
the Reminder unto me” (R). This then prompted his opponents’ reference to him
as the one unto whom the Reminder has been sent down. This was not an
affirmation of their belief in him as God’s Messenger; rather, as al-ṭabrisī notes,
it was a way of mocking him. For the accusation that the Prophet was possessed,
see 23:70; 34:8; 44:14; 51:39; 68:51. Elsewhere, the Quran states that this charge
of being possessed is also leveled against the other prophets by the people to
whom they were sent, as in 51:52: Likewise, there came no messenger unto those
before them, but that they said, “A sorcerer or one possessed.” More
specifically, this accusation is also leveled against Moses (26:27) and Noah
(54:9).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:15:9 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 15:9 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
| Truly it is We Who have sent down the Reminder, and surely We
are its Preserver.9
For the Reminder as a reference to the Quran, see v. 6. We are its
Preserver, which is one of the Quranic phrases most often quoted by Muslims as
proof of the inviolability of the Quranic text, is understood to mean that God will
protect the Quran from any alterations or additions to its words, as in 41:42:
Falsehood comes not upon it from before it or from behind it; a revelation from
One Wise, Praised; and 4:82: Do they not contemplate the Quran? Had it been
from other than God, they would surely have found much discrepancy therein
(R); see also 18:1; 75:17. Based upon the understanding of this and other verses,
Muslims maintain that the Quran is not susceptible to being falsified, owing to
the widespread manner in which it has been memorized, studied, and
proliferated among believers (R). It is also said that God’s Protection of the
Quran extends to the miraculous nature of its order, which protects the Quran
just as the walls surrounding a city fortify and protect the city (R). According to
another interpretation, God preserves the Quran through the Quran reciters(
qurrāʾ), who traditionally memorize it and whose hearts are “the treasuries of
His Book” (Qu). See also the essay “The Islamic View of the Quran.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:15:29 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 15:29 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
) so when I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My
Spirit, fall down before him prostrating.”29
This verse is identical to 38:72; cf. 32:9. I have proportioned him is
understood to be a reference to God’s creating the human being in the most
perfect manner in order to receive His Spirit (Z); cf. 95:4: Truly We created man
in the most beautiful stature
. In interpreting I . . . breathed into him of My Spirit,
many commentators see My Spirit as a reference to God’s Power, though others
take the phrase more literally as the Spirit (
al-rūḥ) and see it as explaining why
Iblīs would be called upon to bow before Adam; see 38:72c.
God’s commanding the angels to bow before Adam is an essential part of the
Quranic account of his creation; see 2:34; 7:11; 17:61; 18:50; 20:116; 38:73–74.
The angels’ bowing implies that before falling from Heaven, human beings
occupied a station higher than that of the angels, or that the angels were bowing
to God but taking Adam as their qiblah (i.e., the direction of prayer); see 7:11c.
See also 12:100, where Joseph’s family bows down to him in fulfillment of his
dream in 12:4.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:16:17 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 16:17 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ź Is He Who creates like one who creates not? Will you not, then,
reflect?17
Following the mention in the preceding verses of natural phenomena,
which God has created for the benefit of human beings, the present verse asks
whether one would still worship lifeless idols rather than God, Who created all
of these blessings (R). The one who creates not is a reference to the idols
worshipped by the Makkan idolaters (R, Z), and the verse serves as a rebuke to
those who would make their idols equal to the Creator by referring to them as“gods” and worshipping them (R).
Ashʿarite theologians adduced this ve
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
