<<chunk 726 part 1 of 0..1>>
es upon me in which I do not
increase in a knowledge that draws me nearer to God, may God not bless me that
day” (Ṭs). Thus, if the Prophet is told to pray for increase in knowledge, then, a
fortiori, all Muslims are expected to do the same. Hence, Ibn ʿArabī says, “God
did not say to His Prophet, Say, ‘My Lord! Increase me in knowledge!’, nor did
He allow us to hear that, except as a way of alerting us so that we would [also]
say this and seek increase from God. If this were specific to the Prophet, God
would not have allowed us to hear it, or He would have mentioned that it was
specific to him” (
Futūḥāt, II: 531.7). This supplication has often been a prayer of
the Sufis in particular, although it is used by pious Muslims in general.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:115 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:115 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ĕ And We indeed made a pact with Adam aforetime, but he forgot.
And We found no resoluteness in him.
115
The pact that God made with Adam refers to His telling him not to
approach the tree (R); see 2:35c; 7:19c. By aforetime is meant either before
Adam’s actual eating from the tree or, more generally, before the coming of the
Prophet Muhammad and the revelation of the Quran (R). He forgot denotes
Adam’s forgetting his pact (Q) or abandoning it (JJ, Q); see also v. 121. The
Prophet is reported to have said, “Adam forgot, and thus his progeny forgot.”Adam is the model for human beings to follow, since God taught Adam the
names, all of them (2:31). According to the close spiritual companion of Jalāl al-
Dīn Rūmī, Shams-i Tabrīzī (disappeared in 644/1247), people should keep in
mind that Adam only forgot one time, and so they also should allow themselves
to forget only once. Concerning the person who constantly falls into error in the
spiritual life, Shams says, “The custom of his father [Adam] was [that he only
forgot] one time—once is enough!” (
Maqālāt [Tehran, 1990], 767). On human
forgetfulness, see 59:19c.
We found no resoluteness in him can mean that God did not find in Adam the
resolve to disobey Him (R), although he and his wife did eat from the tree
because they were deceived by Satan (see 7:21–22c); in other words, he erred,
but did not do so intentionally (Ṭs). Or We found no resoluteness in him can
mean that God did not find in Adam the moral resolve to obey His Prohibition
against eating from the tree (R). According to this latter interpretation, some see
the reference to God not finding resoluteness in Adam as the reason for his not
being counted as one of the resolute among the messengers (ūlu’ l-ʿazmi min al-
rusul
), for whom, see 46:35c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:117 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:117-119 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ė We said, “O Adam! Truly this is an enemy unto thee and thy wife.
So let him not expel the two of you from the Garden, such that thou
wouldst be wretched.Ę Truly it is for thee that thou shalt neither hunger therein, nor go
naked,ę and that thou shalt neither thirst therein, nor suffer from the heat of
the sun.”117–19
For the warning to Adam and Eve that Satan is an enemy unto
them, see 7:21–22c. Let him not expel the two of you from the Garden is an
admonition from God to Adam and Eve that they should not obey Satan, for he
will cause them to leave the Garden through his deceiving them to eat from the
forbidden tree (Kl). Such that thou wouldst be wretched refers to the hardship
and fatigue that Adam and Eve would experience because of the need to earn a
livelihood in this world (M, Z). In other words, by obeying Satan, they would
leave their state of comfort in the Garden and descend into the life of this world,
which is filled with hardship; see also 2:36; 7:24–25. Thus, the references in v.
118 to being neither hungry nor naked, and in v. 119 to neither being thirsty nor
experiencing the sun’s heat, evoke the state of complete ease and comfort that
Adam and Eve experienced in the Garden, which is juxtaposed to the hardships
of the life of this world which they would encounter if they were to succumb to
Satan’s suggestions. For other accounts of Adam and Eve’s being warned by
God, Satan’s deceiving them, their fall from Paradise, and their remorse over
their actions, see 2:35–37 and 7:19–23.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:123 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:123 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ģ He said, “Get down from it, both you together, each of you an
enemy to the other. And if guidance should come unto you from Me,
then whosoever follows My Guidance shall not go astray, nor be
wretched.
123
This verse is understood to be an address to Adam and Eve and their
future progeny, indicating their banishment from Paradise, but also the means by
which they could recover their original nature while on earth—by following
God’s Guidance. See also 2:38–39c; 7:24–25c. For the significance of the fall of
Adam and Eve, see 7:24–25c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:124 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:124-127 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ĥ But whosoever turns away from the remembrance of Me, truly his
shall be a miserable life, and We shall raise him blind on the Day of
Resurrection.”ĥ He will say, “My Lord! Why hast Thou raised me blind, when I
used to see?”Ħ He will say, “Thus it is. Our signs came unto you, but you forgot
them. Even so, this Day shall you be forgotten!”ħ Thus do We recompense whosoever is prodigal and believes not in
the signs of his Lord. And surely the punishment of the Hereafter is
more severe and more lasting.
124–27
The remembrance of Me can refer to the Quran in particular (JJ), in
which case it would be translated “My Reminder,” or to the guidance that
reminds people of God and calls them to Him in general (Aj). A miserable life is
a life that is constricted (Kl, Ṭ), especially spiritually. Or, it may refer to a life in
which one is merely given to the things of the world and lives in a state where he
is fearful of their being taken away from him, which is contrasted with the life of
the believer—that is, one who lives in hope for the world to come, who may be
safe from evil and disbelief, and whose life is whelmed in the grace (
barakah
) of
faith (Bḍ). Juxtaposing such people with the believers, al-Zamakhsharī calls
attention to 16:97: Whosoever works righteousness, whether male or female, and
is a believer, We shall give them new life, a good life, and We shall surely render
unto them their reward in accordance with the best of that which they used to do.
Some people are said to be raised blind on the Last Day and in the Hereafter,
even though they could see with their physical sight while alive on earth. This
form of blindness in the Afterlife is the direct result of spiritual blindness in the
life of this world, as in 17:72: And whosoever was blind in this [life] will be
blind in the Hereafter, and further astray from the way; see also 17:97, and
22:46: Truly it is not the eyes that go blind, but it is hearts within breasts that go
blind
. For the various types of spiritual blindness in this world, see 5:71c. From
another perspective, those who were spiritually blind in this life will come to“see” the reality of things in the next life; that is, they will come to witness, in a
crystal-clear manner, the truths they rejected in this life (see 20:102–4c; 50:22).
To forget Our signs (v. 126) means to abandon and disbelieve in God’s signs
(JJ), namely, the proofs brought by His messengers (Aj). For God’s “forgetting”the disbelievers on the Last Day, see 7:51c and 45:34c. For the prodigal, see
10:12c. The promise that the chastisement of the Hereafter is more severe and
more lasting means that the disbeliever’s perpetual blindness in the Hereafter is
more intense than any kind of constriction that he will experience in this life (Z).
Alternately, it can mean that God’s leaving the disbeliever in his state of
blindness in the Hereafter is more intense and longer-lasting than the blindness
that results from his turning away from God’s signs (Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:133 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:133 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ij They say, “Why has he not brought us a sign from his Lord?”Has there not come unto them the clear proof of that which is in the
scriptures of old?
133
The Makkans made repeated requests for the Prophet to bring them a
sign (6:37; 10:20; 13:7, 27; see also 6:37c; 10:20c). The clear proof of that
which is in the scriptures of old is a reference to the various stories in the Quran
that are also found in the previous scriptures, accounts that serve as clear proofs
that the Quran comes from God (Kl). Alternatively, this part of the verse can be a
reference to those parts of the Torah and the Gospel that mention the Prophet
Muhammad (Kl); see 7:157c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:135 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:135 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ĵ Say, “Each is waiting, so wait! For you shall come to know those
who are the companions of the sound path, and those who are rightly
guided.”135
That each is waiting means each party is waiting to see what its
outcome will be, either in this life or at the time of death (R). The words for you
shall come to know are intended to threaten and frighten the disbelievers (R); see
also 10:20c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:21:32 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 21:32 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ò And We made the sky a canopy preserved; yet they turn away from
its signs.32
Preserved means preserved from the satans (R), or it connotes“upraised” (cf. 52:5; Ṭ), meaning protected from falling down to the earth (Q).
The sky as canopy (
saqf
) is also mentioned in 2:22; 40:64; 79:28. It is said the
idolaters turn away in the face of the signs of the heavens, including the sun,
moon, and stars (Ṭ).


<<end of chunk>>
