<<chunk 726 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:21 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:21 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
! He said, “Take hold of it, and fear not! We shall restore it to its
former way.21
Elsewhere in the Quran, when the staff becomes a serpent, Moses is said
to have turned in retreat without returning (27:10; 28:31). Some say that Moses’fear was assuaged when God informed him that He would cause the serpent to
return to its former way (R), that is, its form as a staff (Aj). Yet others say that
after God told Moses not to fear, a state of tranquility and contentment overcame
him so that he was no longer fearful (R); see also 27:10–11c; cf. Exodus 4:3–4.
Moses then laid hold of the serpent by its mouth, grabbing it by either the teeth
or the jaw, at which time God turned it back into a wooden staff (R). Al-Qurṭubīexplains that God showed Moses the serpent as a way of preparing him so that
when he would go to Pharaoh and cast his staff before him and his entourage, he
would not be frightened.
Some philosophers and mystics read this verse as alluding to various aspects
of the human being’s lower nature. Moses’ staff, which became a serpent, is seen
as the unrefined human soul which must be conquered in order for the soul’s true
nature to be actualized, as explained by Mullā Ṣadrā: “There is no serpent like
your soul; so slay it and purify it of the stain of its false beliefs and ugly
opinions; or subjugate it until it becomes a muslim in your hand. First cast it
aside like the staff of Moses; then pick it up with your right hand after it has
returned to its former way and primordial disposition. It shall then live an
intellectual life, striving for the Return and the Final Abode” (
Mafātīḥ al-ghayb
[Beirut, 2002], 81).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:25 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:25-28 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
% He said, “My Lord! Expand for me my breast!& Make my affair easy for me,' and untie a knot from my tongue,( that they may understand my speech.25–28
This part of Moses’ prayer is commonly uttered by Muslims at times
of difficulty and anxiety. Moses’ prayer for his breast to be expanded is seen as a
prayer to God to fill his being with the light of faith and certainty, or to help him
carry out his message properly (R); see also 94:1c. Moses’ request that God untie
a knot from his tongue is thought by some Muslim and Jewish commentators
(see 26:12–13c) to be a reference to a physical speech impediment (Q, Z),
namely a lisp.
The commentators relate a story that, while still a child, Moses struck
Pharaoh and pulled some of the hair out of his beard, an act that threatened
Pharaoh, as he interpreted it to mean that Moses would one day become his
enemy and cause his kingdom to perish (according to some, Pharaoh had already
developed a fear that one of the sons of the Israelites would overthrow him,
which is arguably why he ordered that they all be killed; see 2:49c). Pharaoh
ordered Moses to be put to death, but Pharaoh’s wife Āsiyah (regarding whom
see 66:11c) tried to protect Moses, assuring him that Moses was just a young
child and did not have the ability to discriminate between right and wrong. In
order to test Moses, Pharaoh put a fiery coal and a ruby before him. If Moses
took the ruby, that would mean that he could discriminate between things that
look the same, but are in fact very different. In that case, Pharaoh would put him
to death, since that would mean that he attacked Pharaoh intentionally and would
one day be responsible for his demise. But if Moses took the fiery coal, that
would mean that he could not discriminate between the objects placed before
him, confirming Āsiyah’s defense of him and rendering his actions not worthy of
punishment. With the objects in front of Moses, Gabriel came and guided his
hand to lay hold of the fiery coal, which Moses then accidentally placed into his
mouth, thereby burning his tongue and impeding his speech (Q, R, Ṭ); see also
43:52c.
Al-Rāzī observes that Moses’ request that God untie a knot from his tongue
was motivated by his desire to be able to communicate effectively the message
with whose delivery God had charged him. This is why Moses then says in v. 28,
that they may understand my speech, that is, in conveying God’s message (JJ).
According to Ibn Juzayy, the reason Moses requested that God only loosen and
not completely remove a knot from his tongue is that he was not asking for
complete eloquence, but for enough of the speech impediment to be removed so
that people would understand his message clearly; cf. Exodus 4:10–11. Moses’request was granted, for which, see v. 36c.
It is also possible that there is a connection between Moses’ request that his
breast be expanded and that a knot in his tongue be loosened, namely his
anticipating that, upon being denied by Pharaoh and his people and being called
a liar by them, he would feel constriction in his breast, which would then result
in his inability to speak with facility; see 26:12–13c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:42 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:42 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
B Go forth, thou and thy brother, with My signs, and tire not in the
remembrance of Me.42
My signs refers to the nine signs given to Moses (JJ; see 17:101c). Tire
not in the remembrance of Me means to not weaken in conveying the message
(Q). According to a spiritual interpretation of this verse, it means that one should
not invoke God only with the tongue while the heart is not vigilant and aware of
the One who is being invoked (ST); see also vv. 33–34.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:55 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:55 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
U From it We created you, and unto it We shall bring you back, and
from it We shall bring you forth a another time.55It here refers to the earth (arḍ; Ṭ) or dust (
turāb; K), although the latter
can also denote “earth.” See also 43:11. This verse is often recited at Muslim
funerals, as it instructs people that human beings are made of earth (i.e., clay),
are buried in it when they die, and shall be resurrected from it on the Last Day.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:61 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:61 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
a Moses said to them, “Woe unto you! Do not fabricate a lie against
God, lest He should destroy you with a punishment. Whosoever
fabricates [lies] has failed.”61
In this context, Moses’ words Do not fabricate a lie against God mean,“Do not call God’s signs and miracles sorcery” (Z); see also 10:77.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:62 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:62-64 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
b So they debated their affair among themselves and kept secret their
intimate discourse.c They said, “These two are sorcerers who wish to expel you from
your land with their sorcery and to do away with your exemplary way
of life.d So gather your plot, then come in ranks. Today, whosoever gains
the upper hand will surely have prospered!”62–64
Upon hearing Moses’ words, the sorcerers consulted one another in
private concerning the best means by which they could oppose and overcome
him (Aj). Al-Māturīdī, the important Quran commentator and founder of the
Māturīdī school of Sunni theology, notes that the sorcerers’ statement that Moses
and Aaron wish to expel them from their land is taken from an identical
statement by Pharaoh with regard to Moses in 26:34–35: Truly this is a knowing
sorcerer, who desires to expel you from your land with his sorcery (see also v.
57). Their sorcery refers to the miracles that Moses performed for Pharaoh
earlier (Aj), namely the nine signs that Pharaoh took to be sorcery (see v. 56). By
their exemplary way of life the sorcerers were referring to their easy lifestyle,
which entailed all of their needs being met by the Israelites by virtue of the
Egyptians’ dominance over them (M).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:67 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:67-68 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
g whereat Moses conceived a fear in his soul.h We said, “Fear not! Truly thou art uppermost.67–68
Moses conceived a fear in his soul means fear entered into his heart
because, after the sorcerers had caused their ropes to appear as serpents and were
seen by the people, Moses was apprehensive that this might prevent the people
from seeing the truth of the sign with which he had come (M).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:74 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:74-76 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
t Verily, whosoever comes unto his Lord guilty, surely his shall be
Hell, wherein he neither dies nor lives.u But whosoever comes unto Him as a believer, having performed
righteous deeds, theirs shall be the highest ranks—v Gardens of Eden with rivers running below, abiding therein. That
is the recompense of one who purifies himself.74–76
One neither dies nor lives in Hell because its inhabitants will not
experience rest in it, nor will they live a kind of life from which they can draw
positive benefit (JJ); see also 14:16–17; 87:13. For the various ranks in Paradise,
see 4:96c. The Gardens of Eden are mentioned in several places in the Quran;
see 13:23; 16:31; 18:31; 35:33; 98:8.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:20:114 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 20:114 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ĕ Exalted is God, the True Sovereign. Be not in haste with the Quran
before its revelation is completed for thee, but say, “My Lord!
Increase me in knowledge!”114
This verse refers to the Prophet’s fear of forgetting the verses of
revelation, which led him to repeat quickly what was being revealed to him by
the Archangel Gabriel while the revelation was taking place (Q, R); see
75:16–18c. Alternatively, it could be an admonishment to the Prophet not to seek
to receive the revelation before its appropriate time (R).
My Lord! Increase me in knowledge! is commonly invoked by Muslims at
various times, such as when they are students beginning their studies. The
Prophet is reported to have said, “If a day com
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
