<<chunk 728 part 1 of 0..1>>
oned in 2:169, 268.
***" And let not the men of bounty and means among you forswear
giving to kinsfolk and the indigent and those who emigrated in the
way of God. And let them pardon and forbear. Do you not desire that
God forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Merciful.22
Some connect this verse to Abū Bakr, who used to give charity to his
impoverished maternal cousin, Misṭaḥ ibn Uthāthah. But when it became clear
that he was one of the three main culprits in propagating the lie against ʿĀʾishah,
Abū Bakr vowed not to give Misṭah charity ever again (Q, R, Ṭ). Others say this
verse was revealed in connection with all such persons (Q). It is reported that
after this verse was revealed, Abū Bakr said, “Yea, by God I desire, O Lord, that
Thou forgivest us!” returned to Miṣtaḥ, and promised not to withhold charity
from him (IK). Some commentators speak of this verse as the “most hopeful” in
the Quran, as it shows God’s Kindness even to those who commit slander (Q).
Other verses listed as being among those that are “most hopeful” include 2:260;
33:47; 39:53; 42:19, 22; 93:5 (Q); see also 2:260c. Al-Rāzī notes the great moral
challenge that this verse presented to Abū Bakr, who was thereby enjoined to
continue giving regular charity to a man who had defamed his own daughterʿĀʾishah—that is, to respond to evil with good, not in kind. See 13:22 and 28:54
for the injunction to repel evil with good.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:24:36 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 24:36 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ö [It is] in houses that God has permitted to be raised and wherein
His Name is remembered. He is therein glorified, morning and
evening,
36This verse is usually read as a continuation of the previous verse,
meaning that the lamp or “lighted wick” is in a niche within houses (Ṭ) or,
similarly, that the light is kindled in the houses (R). It could also be read as a new
sentence: “In houses that God has permitted to be raised and wherein His Name
is remembered, He is therein glorified morning and evening.” By houses many
understand mosques, while others extend it to mean all houses (R, Ṭ) or else
specific places such as the Kaʿbah, the Holy Sanctuary (in Jerusalem), the
Prophet’s mosque in Madinah, or the Qubāʾ mosque (see commentary on
9:107–8; Q, R). That the houses are raised refers to either the building of such
houses, their exaltation, or both (R, Ṭ). Many commentators believe that the
glorification (
tasbīḥ) mentioned here refers to the Muslim canonical prayer(ṣalāh
; Q, R, Ṭ). Continuing the symbolism from the previous verse, houses is
understood here by Sufis to be a symbol for the illumination of the hearts of
human beings in which the Name of God is remembered (Aj). The juxtaposition
of the general word houses and the remembrance of God’s Name is also
suggestive of the different kinds of houses of worship mentioned in 22:40, which
speaks of monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, wherein God’s
Name is mentioned much.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:24:37 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 24:37 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
× by men whom neither trade nor buying and selling distract from
the remembrance of God, the performance of prayer, and the giving of
alms, fearing a day when eyes and hearts will be turned about,37
The language here is similar to that in 63:9: Let neither your property
nor your children divert you from the remembrance of God; and 62:9: When you
are called to the congregational prayer, hasten to the remembrance of God and
leave off trade
. The phrase when eyes and hearts will be turned about refers to
the terror and awe experienced on the Day of Judgment (Ṭ), and related imagery
is used to describe eyes and hearts in 14:42–43: He merely grants them reprieve
till a day when eyes will stare, transfixed, running with necks outstretched and
heads upraised, their glance returning not to them, their hearts vacant.
Continuing the symbolism of the previous verse, the houses can be said to
symbolize the hearts of those who are afraid of their eyes and hearts being turned
away from the remembrance of God (Aj).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:25:2 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 25:2 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
* He unto Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the
earth, and Who took not a child, and Who has no partner in
sovereignty, and Who created everything, then measured it out with
due measure.2
For God’s sovereignty, see Sūrah 67, “Sovereignty”; see also 67:1c;
36:83c. For a discussion of the Quran’s rejection of the notion of God having a
child, which includes both Arab pagan beliefs concerning “daughters of God”and the Christian doctrine of Jesus as son of God, see 2:116c; 6:101–2c.
Measured it out with due measure (cf. 76:16) renders a phrase composed of a
verb (
qaddara
) and the verb’s corresponding verbal noun (
taqdīr
). It is a word
that encompasses both knowing the measure of a thing and bestowing a measure
upon a thing and thus also has within its range of meaning the sense of“estimation” and also “ordainment.” This range of meaning has implications for
the theological questions surrounding the order found in creation as well as both
God’s Knowledge of things and His Power over them, which is to say that it has
bearing on questions of God’s Omniscience and Omnipotence. Al-Rāzī notes
that, as it concerns human beings, taqdīr is an act of estimation or assessment,
but because God’s Knowledge is eternal and unchanging, the Divine taqdīr
refers to God’s Knowledge of a creature’s entire existence from beginning to
end. Other commentators emphasize the sense of taqdīr as ordainment or“predestination,” referring to the bestowal and ordainment of everything a
creature was, is now, or ever will be (IK, Q). In this latter sense taqdīr is similarto qadar, or one’s “lot” or “measuring out,” a concept that in the theological
tradition often refers to the doctrine of Divine predestination; see 54:47–49;
6:60c; 17:13–14c; 17:30c; 65:3c; 68:1c; 91:8c, and the essay “The Quran and
Schools of Islamic Theology and Philosophy.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:25:32 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 25:32 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ò And the disbelievers say, “Why was the Quran not sent down upon
him as a single whole?” It is so, that We may make firm thine heart
thereby. And We have recited it unto thee in a measured pace.32
The Quran was revealed over the course of the Prophet’s entire mission
of twenty-two or twenty-three years; see the essay “The Islamic View of the
Quran.” The message of this verse is connected with 11:120: All that We recount
unto thee of the stories of the messengers is that whereby We make firm thine
heart
. Some understand We have recited it unto thee in a measured pace to
mean, “We have explained to thee its interpretation” (IK, Ṭ). Many
commentators highlight the relationship of the Quran to the events of the life of
the Prophet, the gradual legislation of commands and prohibitions, and the
manner in which successive revelations were both necessary for the
establishment of the Islamic community and a source of support and help for the
Prophet during his struggles with his enemies (IK, Q, R). Al-Rāzī understands
the gradual application of the commands and prohibitions, the memorization and
understanding of one part at a time, and the responsiveness of the revelation to
the questions and states of the believers to be among the benefits of the
successive revelation of the Quran; see also commentary on 17:106: And [We
sent it down] as a recitation We have divided in parts, that thou mayest recite it
unto men in intervals, and We sent it down in successive revelations. At the same
time, some commentators describe how the Quran descended all at once from
the Preserved Tablet (85:22) or Mother of the Book (13:39) into the highest state
of the cosmos (“the heaven of this world”) and, once established there,
descended gradually over time to the Prophet (IK).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:25:47 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 25:47 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
G And He it is Who made the night a garment for you, and made
sleep repose, and made day a resurrection.47
In connection with waking as a resurrection (
nushūr
), some mention the
proverb, “Sleep is the brother of death” (Ṭ). Sleep is also associated with death
in 6:60: He it is Who takes your souls by night, and also 39:42: God takes souls
at the moment of their death, and those who die not during their sleep; see
commentary on these two verses. The night, sleep, and day are described using
similar language in 78:9–11.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:26:71 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 26:71-73 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
q They said, “We worship idols, and we remain ever devoted to
them.”r He said, “Do they hear you when you call?s Or do they benefit or harm you?”71–73
Similar language is used in 20:91, where the Israelites tell Aaron
regarding their new idol: We shall not cease to be its devotees till Moses returns
unto us; and 20:97, where Moses says to them: Now observe your god, to whom
you remained devoted: We shall surely burn it and scatter its ashes in the sea!


<<end of chunk>>
