<<chunk 728 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:24:10 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 24:10-22 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ċ And were it not for God’s Bounty upon you, and His Mercy, and
that God is Relenting, Wise!10–22
This passage relates to an incident involving the Prophet’s wifeʿĀʾishah. According to the traditional accounts, while on a journey ʿĀʾishah’s
necklace fell from her neck two times. The first time, the Prophet ordered the
Muslims to make camp to look for it, and eventually the verse related to ritual
purification by dust was revealed (for the full account, see 4:43c). The second
time, ʿĀʾishah again realized that her necklace had fallen, and she left the
enclosed tentlike saddle atop her camel to go look for it. At the time, it was said
that ʿĀʾishah was still fourteen and slight of build, and those who led her mount
did not detect that the covered saddle was empty. ʿĀʾishah, expecting that the
group would not leave without her, returned to the campsite to find that everyone
had left. She waited, expecting that sooner or later they would realize their
oversight and return, and fell asleep. Eventually a man named Ṣafwān ibnMuʿaṭṭal found her and brought her back to the main group, leading her on his
mount. Ṣafwān is described in the sources as having been a valorous, chaste man
who tended the Prophet’s camel during battles and was later killed in battle
during the caliphate of ʿUmar (Q). Soon after Ṣafwān brought ʿĀʾishah back to
the encampment, rumors began to spread accusing ʿĀʾishah of committing
adultery with Ṣafwān.
***Ě Truly those who brought forth the lie were a group among you. Do
not suppose it to be an evil for you. Rather, it is a good for you. Unto
each man among them is the sin he committed. And he among them
who undertook the greater part of it, his shall be a great punishment.11
The group among you was reported to consist mainly of three people,ḥassān ibn Thābit, Misṭaḥ ibn Uthāthah, and Ḥamnah bint Jaḥsh, though others
report that the group consisted of ten or even up to forty persons (Q). Who
undertook the greater part of it is thought to refer to Ḥassān ibn Thābit; this
phrase is meant to refer to the person who began the rumor and therefore carried
the greatest blame for it (Ṭ). According to some reports, Ḥassān later went blind,
which was interpreted by some as his recompense (Q, Ṭ); it is also recorded thatṢafwān struck a nonlethal blow to his head with his sword (Q, R). Others
interpret the one who undertook the greater part of it to refer to ʿAbd Allāh ibn
Ubayy, usually thought of as the leader of the hypocrites and described as having
had an important role in the scandal (Ṭ).
There are also differing reports as to whether the Prophet beat or lashed these
three scandalmongers. In one account, only ḥassān received a corporal
punishment; other reports indicate that all three did; and still others report that
none of them did, because such punishments require clear evidence in order to
be carried out, and the evidence of guilt was insufficient in this case (Q). For al-
Qurṭubī this gap between moral culpability and criminal liability is reminiscent
of the fact that, though the hypocrites are mentioned frequently in the Quran,
they are not named in such a way as to bring a legal claim against them. He
reports that in the most well known account these three were lashed, but thatʿAbd Allāh ibn Ubayy was not.
Rather, it is a good for you is interpreted to mean that the “bringing forth” of
this lie was a good thing for the community, either because, rather than leaving
the people suspicious and uncertain, the matter was resolved openly and put to
rest, or because it resulted in the revelation of these Quranic verses about the
issue (R). When the good that comes from this development is understood to be
for the benefit of the false accusers rather than the victims of the scandal(ʿĀʾishah and Ṣafwān and by extension the Prophet and ʿĀʾishah’s family), it
can be seen as preventing them from carrying on in sin or as providing a
punishment in this life that would avert a harsher punishment in the Hereafter
(R).
***Ī Why, when you heard it, did not the believing men and women
think well of their own, and say, “This is a manifest lie”?12
This verse encapsulates the ethical principle of erring against suspicion
and not repeating something one has heard if its source is unreliable or unknown
(Q). In this connection al-Rāzī quotes the ḥadīth, “In their togetherness and
compassion for one another and what God placed between them, the Muslims
are like unto a single body. When one part is afflicted, the whole will be afflicted
by fever and wakefulness.” Islamic ethical writings make frequent mention of“positive presumption” or “thinking well [of others]” (ḥusn al-ẓann
), which can
apply to human beings as well as on another level to God. In the former case, it
refers to the presumption of innocence and good character in others, and in
relation to God it refers to belief in God’s Compassion and Mercy.
***ĺ Why did they not bring forth four witnesses thereto? For when they
brought not the witnesses, it is they who were then liars in the Eyes of
God.13
This verse refers to the requirement that accusations of sexual
misconduct be supported by four eyewitnesses, as mentioned in 4:15 and 24:4.
Al-Rāzī discusses the possibility that a person might be truthful in his or her
accusation of adultery, but fail to produce four witnesses. He suggests that it
could mean that, as a matter of law and dealing with such an accuser, such an
accuser must be treated as a liar in the absence of the requisite witnesses,
regardless of the merit of the claim.
***Ŋ And were it not for God’s Bounty upon you, and His Mercy, in this
world and the Hereafter, a great punishment would have befallen you
for having engaged [in vain talk] concerning it,14
Empty or vain talk about subjects without benefit is a vice frequently
condemned in the Quran, as in 4:140; 6:68; and 9:65.
***Ś when you accepted it with your tongues, and spoke with your
mouths that whereof you had no knowledge, supposing it to be slight,
though it is great in the Eyes of God.
15Accepted it with your tongues could be translated literally, “You met it
with your tongues,” meaning that they received and transmitted the lie readily(Ṭ). The verb you accepted renders talaqqawna (from the root l-q-y
), which
some read as taliqūna (from the root w-l-q
), meaning to penetrate as with a
weapon, to quickly follow upon something, or to do something quickly in
succession. In such a reading, the phrase could be rendered, “You propagated it
quickly with your tongues.” Slight is understood to mean that they thought no sin
would attach to them on its account (Q, Ṭ).
***Ū And why, when you heard it, did you not say, “It is not for us to
speak of this! Glory be to Thee! This is a tremendous calumny!”16
In traditional Islamic ethics gossip and backbiting are considered
serious vices, even when what is being said is true; see also 49:12c. In this verse,
calumny renders buhtān, which signifies backbiting by telling lies (Q), since one
can also backbite by relating that which is factually true but still damaging to a
person. Glory be to Thee! is understood as an expression of astonishment, or as
an implicit declaration that the wife of God’s chosen Messenger could not do
such a thing, or as an exclamation that God is too Glorious to leave this matter
unattended (R). In the context of this verse discussing calumny, al-Rāzī mentions
several aḥādīth pertaining to it, such as, “A Muslim is he from whose tongue the
Muslims are safe, and the Emigrant is he who emigrates from what God has
forbidden.”***ź God exhorts you, lest you ever return to the like of it, if you are
believers.Ɗ And God makes clear unto you the signs, and God is Knowing,
Wise.17–18
If you are believers means if the accusers heed God’s Exhortation(Ṭ) and never repeat the same type of accusation in the future (IK). God makes
clear the signs is mentioned elsewhere in the Quran (e.g., 2:187, 221, 242;
3:103; 5:89; 24:59), and in this case the signs can be understood as referring to
the laws and rulings that benefit His servants (IK).
***ƚ Truly those who desire that indecency be spread among those who
believe, theirs shall be a painful punishment in this world and the
Hereafter. God knows, and you know not.19
Those who desire that indecency be spread among believers shall be
punished unless they make sincere repentance (Q). This verse, and indeed this
entire passage, is understood as a warning against such slander-mongering and a
reminder to the believers that their inner thoughts are not hidden from God (R).
In this connection Ibn Kathīr mentions the ḥadīth, “Do not insult the servants of
God, and do not reproach them, and do not look for their faults. Whosoever
looks for the faults of his Muslim brother, God will look for his faults so much
so that He will expose him in his home.”***Ȋ And were it not for God’s Bounty toward you, and His Mercy, and
that God is Kind, Merciful!20
The result contingent upon were it not is implied (cf. v. 10), meaning
that were it not for God’s Bounty, the slanderers would have been worse off,
either through their own ultimate perdition or because the slander would have
spread even farther (R). It could also refer to the result contingent upon the
similar phrase in v. 21 and thus to their inability to be purified without God’s
Bounty.
***! O you who believe! Follow not the footsteps of Satan! And
whosoever follows the footsteps of Satan, truly he enjoins indecency
and wrong. And were it not for God’s Bounty toward you, and His
Mercy, not one of you would ever be pure. But God purifies
whomsoever He will, and God is Hearing, Knowing.21
To be pure is understood here to mean to be upright or righteous (ṣāliḥ;
Q), or to be rightly guided, or to follow Islam (Ṭ). Other verses that mention
following in the footsteps of Satan include 2:168, 208; 6:142. That Satan
commands to evil or indecency is also menti
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
