<<chunk 730 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:35:18 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 35:18 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ɗ And none shall bear the burden of another. And though one
burdened heavily calls for his burden to be borne, naught of it will be
borne, even if it be kin. Thou warnest only those who fear their Lord
unseen and perform the prayer. And whosoever purifies himself
purifies himself only for his own soul. And unto God is the journey’s
end.18
That none shall bear the burden of another (cf. 6:164; 17:15; 39:7;
53:38)—that is, that no one will bear the sins or duties of others (Aj, IK, R, Ṭ)—points to God’s Justice (Aj). In this context, the phrase can be understood as the
introduction of a new discussion (Q), or as connected to the previous verses in
that being poor in relation to God (see 35:15c) also means that one cannot take
on the burden of another or cast one’s burden upon another (R), since human
beings are powerless to make such determinations. Commentators reconcile this
phrase with 29:13, Surely they will bear their own burdens, and others’ burdens
along with their own, by saying that their own burdens refers to what corrupt
leaders will endure for the sin of having been misled themselves and that others’burdens refers to that for having misled others (Aj). That one who purifies
himself purifies himself only for his own soul means that whoever performs good
deeds receives the benefit of those deeds (IK), just as the first part of this verse
indicates that only those who commit evil deeds suffer the punishment for such
deeds. This verse thus demonstrates a moral reflexivity in which the ultimate
impact of actions, good or bad, is always upon the one who performs these
actions (see 2:9, 272; 3:69; 6:123; 8:60; 9:34–35; 10:23; 29:6).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:35:22 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 35:22 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
" Not equal are the living and the dead. Truly God causes
whomsoever He will to hear, but thou canst not cause those in graves
to hear.22
This verse can be seen as a response to the rhetorical questions posed in
6:122 and 39:22; that is, not equal are the living, those whose hearts are alive
with faith in God, and the dead, those whose hearts are dead because they are
covered with disbelief (Ṭ). That God causes whomsoever He will to hear, but
thou canst not cause those in graves to hear is related to the first part of the
verse in that those whose hearts are alive are those who hear the truth of the
revelation, while those whose hearts are buried in the grave of ignorance cannot
hear it (Ṭ). God’s causing them to hear thus refers to His guiding them and
supporting them (Aj); see also 30:52–53.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:35:28 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 35:28 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
( And of mankind, beasts, and cattle there are, likewise, those of
diverse colors. [Yet] only those among His servants who know fear
God. Truly God is Mighty, Forgiving.28
This verse refers to the differentiation between races and ethnicities, as
in 30:22, And among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth and
the variation in your tongues and colors (IK), but it can also be understood as a
reference to the manner in which the inner states of human beings differ (Q).
Those . . . who know is understood by many to mean those who know that God is
Powerful over all things (IK, Q, Ṭ). In this regard, the Prophet is reported to
have said, “The one among you who has the most knowledge of God is the one
whose fear of Him is most intense” (Z). That only those among His servants who
know fear God is understood to indicate the superiority of knowledge over
worship (R), as in a famous ḥadīth: “Whosoever sets upon a path to seek
knowledge, God will set him upon a path to the Garden. Verily the angels lower
their wings being content with the one who seeks knowledge. And whosoever is
in the heavens and on earth, even the fish in the sea, ask forgiveness for the
person of knowledge. The superiority of one who has knowledge over the
worshipper is as that of the moon over all other heavenly bodies. Those who
have knowledge are the heirs of the prophets, for the prophets did not leave
behind dīnār
s and dirham
s; they only left behind knowledge; and whosoever
receives it, receives an abundance of good fortune.” Yet the manner in which this
verse is followed by the mention of the obligatory acts of worship demonstrates
that such knowledge must be combined with worship and manifest in one’s
actions in order to be of benefit (Bḍ).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:35:36 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 35:36 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ö As for those who disbelieve, theirs shall be the Fire of Hell. They
will neither be done away with so as to die; nor will aught of its
punishment be lightened for them. Thus do We requite every
disbeliever.36
They will neither be done away with so as to die is similar to 20:74:
Verily, whosoever comes unto his Lord guilty, surely his shall be Hell, wherein he
neither dies nor lives. The punishment is not lightened after the disbelievers have
been sentenced, because they had already been granted respite and thus had
many opportunities to repent during the life of this world; see 2:162 and 3:88:
The punishment shall not be lightened for them; nor shall they be granted respite
(cf. 2:86; 16:85; 43:74–75). Rather, God promises, Every time it abates, We shall
increase for them a blazing flame (17:97; cf. 78:30).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:36:12 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 36:12 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ī Truly We give life to the dead and record that which they have sent
forth and that which they have left behind. And We have counted all
things in a clear registry.12
This verse follows upon the counsel to the Prophet to deliver the
warning and leave the disbelievers to their own devices, since the price of their
wrongdoing will come due upon the Resurrection. We give life to the dead can be
seen as a reference to the Resurrection; to God’s bringing the earth back to life,
as in 57:17: Know that God revives the earth after its death (IK); to bringing
people from idolatry to faith (Z); or to the revivification, through knowledge and
truth, of hearts made dead through heedlessness and ignorance (Aj, IK). That
which they have sent forth refers to the deeds that will testify for or against them
in the Hereafter; see 5:80; 75:13c; 82:5c. Here, that which they have left behind
literally means “their footsteps” or “their traces.” It is said to refer to one of the
tribes of Madinah, the Banū Salimah, who were settled far from the Prophet’s
mosque and desired to relocate closer to it. This verse was then revealed. So the
Prophet said to them, “Your footprints are recorded [i.e., you receive reward for
walking to the mosque]. Why then do you want to move?” (IK, Q, Ṭ, W). More
broadly, it is understood as a reference to the traces of good deeds that one
leaves behind (Aj, Ṭ). As a well-known ḥadīth states, “When the son of Adam
dies, all his deeds come to an end except three: knowledge that is beneficial, a
righteous child who prays for him, or ongoing charity that he leaves behind”(IK); see 75:13c. And We have counted all things in a clear registry (
imām
) is
taken by some to allude to the inscription of all things from the beginning of
time to its end on the Preserved Tablet (85:22; Aj, Ṭb, Ṭs), which is the imām
(“leader”) of all other books (Aj) and which is said to comprise all of God’s
Decrees (Ṭb, Ṭs); for the inscription of God’s Decrees, see 68:1c. Others say
imām refers to the book or “registry” in which all human actions are recorded
(Aj, IK, Q, Ṭs); see 17:71c; 18:49c. This is also one of the central verses cited by
Shiite theologians as Quranic support for the Shiite understanding of Divinely
ordained leadership in the form of the imamate after the death of the Prophet. In
this vein al-Qummī relates a saying from ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib: “I, by God, am the
clear imām; I clarify truth from falsehood. I inherited it from the Messenger of
God” (Qm, Ṭb). Shiite sources also relate that the Prophet said regarding ʿAlī,“He is the Imam in whom God records the knowledge of all things” (Qm, Ṭb).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:36:39 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 36:39 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ù And for the moon, We have decreed mansions, till it returns like an
old palm stalk.39
This verse is a reference to the waxing and waning of the moon through
the twenty-eight stations (
manāzil
) of a single lunar month (Q). Like an old palm
stalk is a reference to the appearance of what remains from a date cluster after its
fruit has been removed and it has withered, when it resembles the thin crescent
moon in shape, width, and color (Q, Z).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:36:69 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 36:69 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
i And We have not taught him poetry; nor would it befit him. It is
but a reminder and a clear Quran,69
This verse returns to the discussion of the nature of revelation from the
beginning of the sūrah
. As in 26:224–27, it alludes to those who accused the
Prophet of being merely a poet. According to several accounts, the Prophet did
not have any facility with poetry, either its rhyme or meter (IK, Q). Regarding
the accusations that the Prophet had himself authored the Quran, 29:48 replies,
And thou didst not recite before this any Book; nor didst thou write it with thy
right hand, for then those who make false claims would have doubted
. That the
Quran is but a reminder is repeated in several verses (6:69, 90; 12:104; 38:87;
68:52; 74:31; 81:27). To remind is the function of all revelation; hence the Torah
is called a Reminder (40:54) and the People of the Book (Jews and Christians)
are referred to as the people of the Reminder (16:43; 21:7). In this vein, the
Quran is presented as a continuation of the previous Reminders that clarifies
what humans may have forgotten from them. Thus 16:44 addresse
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
