<<chunk 731 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:39:53 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 39:53 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
S Say, “O My servants who have been prodigal to the detriment of
their own souls! Despair not of God’s Mercy. Truly God forgives all
sins. Truly He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.53
This verse is similar to 4:110: Whosoever does evil or wrongs himself,
and then seeks forgiveness of God, he will find God Forgiving, Merciful. Many
scholars consider this to be among the most hopeful verses of the Quran (others
include 4:48, 116; 24:22; 33:47; 42:19, 22; 93:5) or among “the most joyous
verses of the Quran” (Ṭ). Although this verse addresses all of humanity (Ṭ),
many understand it to have initially addressed the situation of some Makkans
who feared that they could not repent and follow the Prophet because they had
worshipped idols, called upon other deities, killed people whose lives God had
declared inviolable (IK, Ṭ), or fornicated (IK). Their being prodigal to the
detriment of their own souls would then refer to all manner of sin, even their
having killed innocent people in the pre-Islamic Age of Ignorance (
jāhiliyyah;
see 3:154; 5:50; 33:33; 48:26c; Ṭ); for the Quranic usage of “prodigal,” see
10:12c.
Others understand this verse to have been revealed in reference to a small
group of Muslims whom the Makkans had prevented from migrating to Madinah
with the Prophet and then forced, under the pain of persecution, to renounce
Islam; for this they feared they could not repent (Ṭ). According to Thawbān, a
freed slave of the Prophet, the Prophet said, “I would not wish to have the entire
world and all that is in it [in exchange] for this verse: O My servants who have
been prodigal to the detriment of their own souls! Despair not of God’s Mercy.”A man asked, “O Messenger of God, what about someone who associates
partners with God?” The Prophet was silent and then said three times, “And why
not one who associates partners with God?” (Ṭ). Such forgiveness would,
however, be contingent upon the renouncement of idolatry and repentance for it,
since 4:48 states, Truly God forgives not that any partner be ascribed unto Him,
but He forgives what is less than that for whomsoever He will (cf. 4:116).
According to a third opinion, this verse was revealed to correct a group of
Muslims who held that anyone who committed a major sin was among the
people of the Fire (Ṭ). Regarding the manner in which God’s Forgiveness is
intrinsic to the human experience, the Prophet said, “If you did not sin [and seek
forgiveness], God would remove you and come with a people who would sin and
seek forgiveness from God, and He would forgive them.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:39:55 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 39:55 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
U And follow the most beautiful of that which has been sent down
unto you from your Lord, before the punishment comes suddenly
upon you while you are unaware,”55
As in v. 18, what is most beautiful of what God has revealed is not
understood to mean that one part is more beautiful than another (Q, Ṭ), but that
one should act in accord with the revelation, thus maintaining obedience and
avoiding disobedience (Q, R) or practicing what God has enjoined and avoiding
what He has forbidden (Ṭ), since it is only when the injunctions contained in
revelation have been put into practice that their purpose is achieved; see also
39:18c. Some understand this verse to mean that the Quran is the best or most
beautiful of the books that God has sent down (IK, Q), as in v. 23, where it is
referred to as the most beautiful discourse (R).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:39:56 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 39:56 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
V lest any soul should say, “Alas for me, for what I neglected of my
duty to God! Indeed, I was among the scoffers.”56
Lest any soul should say, that is, lest anyone should seek to repent only
when it is too late. Alas for me is understood as an expression of utmost regret
and grief (R) for having failed to perform the deeds enjoined by God (Q, R, Ṭ).
Of my duty to God renders min janbi’Llāh, which literally means “of” or “from
the side of God” and is interpreted to mean, “of God’s Right” (Bḍ), “of
obedience to God” (Q, Ṭs, Z), or “of the reward of God” (Q, Ṭs). In Arabic,“side” (
janb
) can allude to physical, emotional, and spiritual closeness, as when
one speaks of being by another’s side in English. “Of the side of God” could
then refer to being near to God and thus in Paradise, to being in the proximity of
what leads to God (Q), or to seeking nearness to God (Ṭs). The scoffers are those
who scoffed at the Quran and the Messenger (Q, Ṭ).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:39:57 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 39:57 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
W Or lest it say, “If only God had guided me, I would have been
among the reverent.”57
On the one hand, this lament is understood as correct (Q, R), since God
guides whomsoever He will unto a straight path (2:213; 24:46; cf. 2:142; 10:25).
But, on the other hand, people are responsible for not having followed God’s
guidance, for God offered signs, but some chose not to look at or reflect upon
them, turning away from the Quran and being preoccupied with the world and its
vanities. Thus God responds, Nay, My signs did indeed come unto you (v. 59;Ṭs).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:39:58 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 39:58 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
X Or lest it say, when it sees the punishment, “If only I had another
chance, I would be among the virtuous.”58
While those represented in the previous verse blame God for their
having not been guided, those represented in this verse acknowledge some
culpability and ask to be given a second chance, as in 32:12, when the guilty say,
Send us back that we may work righteousness. Truly we are certain. But as they
have been given revelation in this world as well as a reprieve until the moment
of death, such lamentations are not considered sincere and are of no avail, for
even if they were sent back, they would return to the very thing they had been
forbidden. Truly they are liars (6:28).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:40:60 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 40:60 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
` And your Lord has said, “Call upon Me, and I shall respond to you.
Truly those who are too arrogant to worship Me shall enter Hell
debased.”60
Call upon Me, or “Supplicate unto Me,” is understood by many to
mean, “Worship Me,” as when the Prophet said, “Supplication is worship,” and
then recited this verse (Q, Ṭ, Ṭs), and because it is followed by a reference to
those whose pride prevents them from worshipping God (R). The verse can also
be understood as an injunction to call upon God, which would itself imply
worship, as the custom of many Muslims who follow the example of the Prophet
is to supplicate God immediately after the completion the obligatory canonical
prayers. I shall respond to you is a promise from God, but it is not understood to
mean that all supplications will be answered in this life. In this vein, Ibn ʿAjībah
writes, “There is no believer who calls upon God and asks Him for something
but that God gives it to him, in either this life or the Hereafter, where God says
to him, ‘This is what you requested in the world. I have stored it for you until
this day.’” Supplication is considered among the most meritorious of acts,
because in humbly imploring God one admits to one’s servitude and abasement
before Him (R) as well as complete poverty before God and utter need of Him
(ST). Thus most who fail to call upon God do so out of pride and arrogance (R).
There can, however, be those whose immersion in the remembrance of God
keeps them from making a separate supplication, as stated in a famous ḥadīth
qudsī: “For one whose remembrance of Me has distracted him from imploring
Me, I shall give him that which is more bountiful than that which I give to those
who implore Me” (R); for more on the importance of “calling upon God,” see
2:186c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:41:39 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 41:39 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ù Among His signs is that thou seest the earth diminished; then,
when We send down water upon it, it quivers and swells. He Who
gives it life is surely the One Who gives life to the dead. Truly He is
Powerful over all things.39
This is one of several verses to invoke God’s ability to revive barren
land as an argument for His ability to resurrect human beings (cf. 7:57; 16:65;
22:5; 25:48–89; 29:63; 30:19, 24, 50; 35:9; 36:33; 43:11; 45:5; 50:9–11). The
use of this metaphor can also been seen as a reference to the state of the soul that
has become desiccated through heedlessness and hardened by ignorance. Yet
when the water of life or the wine of Divine Love is poured upon it, it stirs and
rises and is revived by the remembrance of God and knowledge of Him (Aj).
Similarly, al-Qushayrī sees this verse as a metaphor for the condition of a heart
to which God draws near when it is humbled by the awareness of the sins that
afflict it and then exhibits the blessings of regret and repentance.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:42:13 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 42:13 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
ĺ He has prescribed for you as religion that which He enjoined upon
Noah, and that which We revealed unto thee, and that which We
enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, that you uphold religion
and not become divided therein. Grievous for the idolaters is that to
which thou callest them. God chooses for Himself whomsoever He
will and guides unto Himself whosoever turns in repentance.13
The first part of this verse is similar to 4:163–64: Verily We have
revealed unto thee, as We revealed unto Noah and the prophets after him, and as
We revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes,
and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and unto David We gave
the Psalms, and messengers We have recounted unto thee before, and
messengers
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
