<<chunk 733 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:54:47 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 54:47-49 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
G Truly the guilty are astray and mad.
47–49
These verses are reported to have been revealed in connection with a
dispute between the Prophet and the idolaters among the Quraysh concerning
God’s “measuring out” (
qadar; IK, Q, R, Ṭ), which refers to the manner in
which God gives or withholds provision for all of creation.47
Mad translates suʿur, which is related to saʿīr, or blaze, a word used
throughout the Quran to refer to the punishment of Hell. Some thus interpret this
verse to mean that the disbelievers are “burning (
yasʿur
) in the Fire” (Bg, Z).
They are thus astray in this world and “in the blaze” in the next (Z).
***H On the Day they are dragged upon their faces into the Fire, “Taste
the touch of Saqar.”48
Dragged upon their faces likely indicates punishment for various
iniquities. In this vein, the Prophet is reported to have said, “Are people thrown
into Hell and dragged up on their faces [or by their nostrils] for anything other
than the harvest of their tongues?” Other verses indicate that the disbelievers willbe gathered upon their faces (17:97; 25:34) and that their faces will be struck by
the angels (8:50; 47:27) and by the Fire (23:104) and covered with dark patches
of night (10:27) or with fire (14:50); see also 21:39; 27:90; 33:66. Saqar is said
to be either a proper name of Hell or an attribute of it (see 74:26–28c). To taste
its touch is thus to taste the punishment of the Fire; see 54:39c.
***I Truly We have created everything according to a measure.49
This verse can be understood as a straightforward affirmation of God’s
creation of all things (M). In relation to the preceding verses, it can also be
understood as a simple statement that God decreed or “measured” a punishment
for the disbelievers and cast them into Saqar
. But due to the Prophet’s own
debate with those who denied God’s qadar, or Decree, this verse became a focal
point for discussing the relation between Divine determinism and human choice.
Qadar, or “measuring out,” is also said to be one of the tenets of faith, regarding
which the Prophet said, “No servant of God truly believes until he believes in
qadar, its good and evil, and until he realizes that what has befallen him was not
going to miss him and what missed him was not going to befall him.”The earliest determinists, known as the Jabariyyah (lit. “Compulsionists”),
held that all human acts were determined by God, including acts of belief,
disbelief, good, and evil. From their perspective, 54:49 supports the position that
God has predetermined all events, especially when read in light of 76:30: And
you do not will but that God wills. Truly God is Knowing, Wise (cf. 81:29).
When considering this verse, those who favored a greater degree of human
choice or self-determination preferred to focus upon the manner in which God
has created everything with precision or “in a perfect measure
.” This theological
debate correlates with the debate over how this verse should be read. As
translated, everything (
kull shayʾ) is read in the accusative (
kulla shayʾin
), the
reading preferred by most commentators and found in all schools of recitation,
but one that is more problematic from a grammatical perspective. If, however,
kull shayʾ is read in the nominative (
kullu shayʾin
), the verse could be
understood to mean, “Everything that We have created is according to a
measure.” This interpretation would still allow one to see the verse as a
declaration of God’s Omnipotence and of Divine determinism, especially when
read in light of the phrase found in 13:16 and 39:62: God is the Creator of all
things (see also 40:62). But it could also lead one to think that there might be
things that God has not created that are not “according to [His] measure.” This
reading would then allow for the possibility that human beings create actions of
their own free will, an understanding that would support both the early Qadarite
theological trend and the Muʿtazilite school of theology. It is thus reported that
adherents of both of these theologies held fast to the reading of kull shayʾ in the
nominative (Iṭ).
The Qadarites held that human beings are free and are the authors of their
own acts, but this does not contravene God’s Omnipotence. The Muʿtazilites
held that human beings are fully responsible for the creation of their evil deeds
and that God simply punishes them accordingly, a position that seeks to absolve
a just and merciful God from the apparent injustice of creating the very acts for
which He then punishes their perpetrators. The Ashʿarite school of theology
finds both of these positions abhorrent, because each would posit a creative
agent outside of God. At the same time, they find the Jabarite position to be
monstrously fatalistic, reducing human beings to passive agents with no will of
their own. Ashʿarite theologians thus sought to explain that God is Just and
Merciful and does not punish people for things for which they are not
responsible, and that human beings bear responsibility for their actions but are
not the creators of these actions, since from their perspective God must be the
Creator of all human acts, as He is the Creator of all things (40:62).
In their efforts to maintain God’s Omnipotence and explain how human
beings could have effective agency in performing their acts, Ashʿarite
theologians make a distinction between the creation of acts and their acquisition(
kasb
). From this perspective, although human beings cannot create anything
because God creates everything that exists or that comes to pass, human beings
nonetheless choose among the options that God has created and thus freely
choose to engage in or play out the acts that God has created, thereby acquiring
the acts.
Commentators who incline more toward the Muʿtazilite position and favor a
greater degree of free will than that allowed for by the Ashʿarite position do not
argue that v. 49 supports their view, but focus instead upon the Divine Wisdom
behind the precise measure with which the universe is created (Ṭs, Z). TheMuʿtazilite theologian al-Zamakhsharī writes, “We have created everything in a
determined measure, ordered according to that which wisdom has decreed, or in
a measure written on the Tablet [see 85:22c], known [to God] before its
existence (
kawn
); We knew its state and its duration (
zamān
).” Likewise, the
Shiite theologian al-Ṭabrisī emphasizes that this verse indicates that nothing has
been created haphazardly, but only as decreed by Divine Wisdom. Everything is
thus created according to “a known measure” and for a known purpose: “the
tongue for speech, the hand for striking, the eye for seeing, the ear for hearing,
the stomach for food; and if anything increased or decreased from what We
measured, then the objective [of creation] would not be attained.”Many who are more closely aligned with the Ashʿarite position also see this
verse as an expression of the Divine Wisdom according to which everything is“measured” (Aj, Āl) and as an affirmation that everything is inscribed on the
Preserved Tablet (85:22; IJ). But many also argue that although human beings
have some effective agency in bringing about their acts through acquisition, or
kasb, they are not able to create and determine, or “measure,” their own actions,
and they see vv. 47–48 as a criticism of those who adhered to such positions.
Along these lines they cite several aḥādīth, among them: “Every community has
its Magians, and the Magians of my community are those who say that there is
no measuring out (
qadar
)” (Āl, IK, Q, R). In elaborating upon their
understanding of Divine determinism, Ashʿarites identify two stages or aspects
of the Divine Decree: the first they call qaḍāʾ, which indicates the pretemporal
Decree of God; the second they call qadar, which indicates the Divine Decree
that brings things into existence in the temporal order, rendering to each its
measure and limit. Qaḍāʾ pertains to the Divine Essence and is neither created
nor finite, while qadar is an attribute of Divine Action that is contingent by
virtue of its association with the contingencies it brings forth. Drawing upon this
distinction, al-Rāzī argues against the philosophical notion that it is necessary for
things to be created in the manner that they are created, saying, “Qaḍāʾ is what
pertains to [God’s] Knowledge, while qadar is what pertains to [God’s] Will.
Therefore, His saying, Truly We have created everything according to a measure,
means by His Measure with His Will, and not, as they claim, that it is‘necessitated.’”Following upon the Ashʿarite position, some see this verse as an indication
that one must put all of one’s trust in God. Thus Ibn ʿAjībah writes: “It washes
the heart of sorrows and of all that is other [than God], and relieves the servant
from the toil of [trying to] arrange and choose, because when a person of
intellect knows with the knowledge of certainty [see 102:5c] that his affairs and
his states and all that comes upon him has been embraced by the measure, with
nothing preceding or coming after its [measured] moment, he entrusts his affair
to God [an allusion to 40:44], surrenders to the decrees (aḥkām
) of his Master,
and meets all that comes upon him with contentment (riḍā) and acceptance, be it
good or evil.” In this same vein, the commentator al-Maybudī writes of this
verse, “One who is deprived [of God], though he may have found everything,
has found nothing, whereas one who has found Him, though he may have found
nothing, has found everything.”For many Sufi thinkers, such as those of the school of Ibn ʿArabī and MullāṢadrā, human choice and Divine determinism are understood in light of the
teaching that human beings bear within them the potential to know the names,
all of them (2:31) and “God created humankind in His image” (Genesis 1:27),
and among God’s Names are al-Murīd (He Who Wills or Wishes) and al-Qadīr
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
