<<chunk 733 part 1 of 0..1>>

(the Powerful, the Possessor of Power). Human freedom is itself a Divine
creation, and because of this could not be in ultimate conflict with God’s creative
act. Thus, unlike some schools of Islamic theology (
kalām
) that see between God
and human beings two competing wills, Sufis see the human will as a
manifestation of God’s own Power and Will. Rather than seeing the question of
human free will as a question merely of choices between options on a particular
plane of reality, Sufis have seen free will ultimately as a characteristic pertaining
to a particular state of being. Only insofar as human beings rise above their
egotistical desires and submit the will that pertains to their own individuality to
God do they realize true freedom in God. But those who attain this true freedom
only will what God wills, because they exist in a state of perfect submission to
the good and thus also display the attributes of something that is, as it were,
totally determined. This is exemplified in a paradox discussed by Ibn ʿArabī,
who says that those saints (
awliyāʾ) most capable of performing miracles are the
least likely to do so, since they are most content with God’s Will for the world
and themselves. Moreover, qadar, or one’s “lot,” is seen, in the ultimate sense, as
a manifestation of one’s own nature or essence as known by God before one’s
creation. Since God transcends the dualities of the world, He transcends the
duality between free will and determinism, but insofar as human beings are free,
they were already free in God by virtue of God’s breathing into the first human
being of His Spirit (see 32:9c).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:55:26 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 55:26-28 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
% So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny?& All that is upon it passes away.' And there remains the Face of thy Lord, Possessed of Majesty and
Bounty.26–27
Cf. 28:88: All things perish, save His Face. These verses mark an
important turn in this sūrah, as vv. 10–25 refer to the blessings or boons of this
world and the remaining verses refer to the blessings of the Hereafter. It is taken
by most as a reference to the earth, the face of the earth, or this world in general,
thus indicating that all of creation will eventually “pass away.” Grammatically itis the Face that is Possessed of Majesty and Bounty
. Since the Arabic word for“face” (
wajh
) is often employed to indicate the very essence of a thing, it is here
taken as a reference to God’s Being and Essence (Q). Some theologians who see
a distinction between God’s Attributes and God’s Essence maintain that this
verse indicates that God’s Attributes will also “pass away” and only the Divine
Essence will remain (R). Al-Rāzī, however, maintains that for this to be the
meaning, one would need to say, “And there remains nothing except the Face of
thy Lord.” According to some, the Face of thy Lord is used instead of the Face
of God, which is used in several other verses (e.g., 2:115, 272; 30:38; 76:9),
because “Lord” is closer to the theme of blessing and bounty that pervades this
sūrah (R). The use of Majesty and Bounty can be seen as a reference to God’s
Attributes of Majesty and God’s Attributes of Beauty, respectively, a division
often made in the discussion of God’s Names and Attributes in Islamic theology.
For many Shiites the Attributes of Beauty are those positive attributes that are
inherent in God’s Essence and manifest the perfection of His Nature, whereas
the Attributes of Majesty are the “negative attributes,” those attributes having to
do with physical qualities such as body, appearance, or movement that would
imply limitation. The result of the negation of such possibilities is thus seen as a
reaffirmation of the positive Divine Attributes.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:55:62 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 55:62-63 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
a So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny?b And beyond these two are two Gardens—62
For the difference between the two Gardens described in vv. 62–76 and
vv. 48–60, see 55:48c.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:55:64 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 55:64-65 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
c So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny?—d of deepest green.64
Deepest green (
mudhāmmatān
) indicates a very dark shade of green due
to the density of vegetation. This is taken by some to indicate that the ground of
these two Gardens is covered with thick vegetation, while in the first two
Gardens trees predominate, so that they are abounding in green branches (v. 48).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:56:71 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 56:71-73 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
q Have you considered the fire that you kindle?r Is it you who brought into being the tree thereof, or is it We Who
bring into being?s We made it a reminder and an enjoyment for the desert dwellers.71–73
Fire is a reminder insofar as it reminds one of the Resurrection or
the Fire in Hell (Aj, Bḍ, Ṭ), regarding which the Prophet said, “This fire of yours
that human beings kindle contains but a seventieth of the heat in Hell” (Ṭ).
Desert dwellers translates muqwīn, which can also refer to all travelers (Q, Sh,
Ṭ) and is taken by some as a reference to everyone who benefits from the use of
fire (Q, Sh, Ṭ).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:58:intro | source STUDYQURAN | verses 58:1-22 | introduction to surah 58 ===
58She Who Disputes
al-MujādilahA
l-Mujādilah is a Madinan sūrah, although some
commentators maintain that only the first ten verses are from
the Madinan period and the remainder is from the Makkan
period; others maintain that the entire sūrah is Madinan except
for v. 9 (Āl, Q). It takes its name from the story of a woman
named Khawlah bint Thaʿlabah, whose husband, Aws ibn al-Ṣāmit, divorced her according to the pre-Islamic custom ofẓihār, in which a man could renounce his wife by saying, “You
are to me as my mother’s back.” Because it addresses this
issue, the sūrah is also known as al-Ẓihār
. By custom, the
invocation of ẓihār meant that the husband was now free of all
duties toward the wife, but that his wife was not free to leave
her husband and contract another marriage. Khawlah
complained of this injustice to the Prophet and to God. Her
plea was heard, and God provided a means whereby she and
her husband could reconcile.
Al-Mujādilah is the first in a series of ten Madinan sūrahs
addressing many of the legal issues that confronted the newly
independent Muslim community in Madinah. Insofar as they
demonstrate God’s immediate involvement in the affairs of the
Muslim community, this series of sūrah
s follows upon the
statement in 57:4: He knows that which enters the earth and
that which issues therefrom, that which descends from Heaven
and that which ascends thereto. And He is with you
wheresoever you are, and God sees whatsoever you do. God’s
Omnipresence is especially indicated in this sūrah, as the first
four verses provide an example of God’s responding directly
and instantly to the plea of a Muslim woman.
After the opening verses (vv. 1–4), which address the issueof ẓihār, vv. 5–6 introduce the discussion of those who oppose
God and His Messenger, the theme of the remainder of the
sūrah
. Vv. 7–10 discuss the secret converse of those who
oppose and deride the Prophet and the proper manner in which
to hold private discourse, followed by vv. 11–13, which
initially enjoin Muslims to offer alms before conversing with
the Prophet and then lighten this injunction. The longest
section, vv. 14–21, addresses the nature of the hypocrites and
their opposition to the Prophet, and the sūrah concludes with a
long verse regarding the rewards that God gives to those who
believe in God and the Last Day.
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful


<<end of chunk>>
