<<chunk 734 part 1 of 0..1>>
adīth, “It is named ‘The Gathering’ [another
translation for al-jumuʿah
], because that is the day on which
Adam’s physical nature (
khalq
) was gathered together” (R) or
“in which God gathered together the physical nature of Adam”(Q; also see IK, Sy).
After extolling the Prophet as a blessing for his followers
present and future (vv. 1–4), al-Jumuʿah warns of the
afflictions that befell the Jews for having failed to uphold the
Torah (vv. 5–8). It then calls the Muslims to take leave of
worldly transactions for a time in order to observe the Friday
congregational prayer (vv. 9–11).
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:62:translation | source STUDYQURAN | verses 62:1-11 | translation of surah 62 (verse medallions shown as (S:A)) ===
(62:1) Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth
glorifies God, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Mighty, the Wise. (62:2) He it
is Who sent among the unlettered a Messenger from among
themselves, reciting unto them His signs, purifying them, and teaching
them the Book and Wisdom, though before they were in manifest
error, (62:3) and others among them, who have not yet joined them. And
He is the Mighty, the Wise. (62:4) That is the Bounty of God, which He
gives to whomsoever He will. And God is Possessed of Tremendous
Bounty. (62:5) The parable of those [who were] made to bear the Torah,
then did not bear it, is that of an ass bearing books. How evil is the
likeness of the people who denied God’s signs! And God guides not
wrongdoing people. (62:6) Say, “O you who are Jews! If you claim that
you are friends unto God apart from [other] people, then long for
death, if you are truthful.” (62:7) But they will never long for it due to
that which their hands have sent forth. And God knows the
wrongdoers. (62:8) Say, “Truly the death from which you flee will surely
meet you; then you shall be returned to the Knower of the Unseen and
the seen, and He will inform you of that which you used to do.” (62:9) “O
you who believe! When you are called to the congregational prayer,
hasten to the remembrance of God and leave off trade. That is better
for you, if you but knew. (62:10) And when the prayer is completed,
disperse throughout the land and seek the Bounty of God, and
remember God much, that haply you may prosper.” (62:11) And when they
see some commerce or diversion, they scatter toward it and leave thee
standing. Say, “That which is with God is better than diversion and
commerce; and God is the best of providers.”

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:62:2 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 62:2 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
* He it is Who sent among the unlettered a Messenger from among
themselves, reciting unto them His signs, purifying them, and teaching
them the Book and Wisdom, though before they were in manifest
error,2
Unlettered (
ummī) indicates those who can neither read nor write, but in
this context can refer to the idolatrous Arabs, who had no scripture (Ṭ), or to
anyone without a Divine book (R; cf. 3:20). Purifying them refers to purification
from idolatry (JJ, Ṭs). This is one of several verses in which the Prophet is said
to teach the Book and Wisdom (cf. 2:129, 151, 231; 3:164), the teaching of which
is part of the primordial covenant made with all prophets, when God said to
them, Should a messenger then come to you confirming that which is with you,
you shall surely believe in him and you shall help him (3:81). The teaching of the
Book and Wisdom is also mentioned in relation to Abraham (4:54), Jesus
(5:110), and Muhammad (4:113). In this context, some interpret Wisdom as a
reference to the prophetic wont (
sunnah
), though it also can be understood more
broadly as a reference to all Divinely inspired knowledge pertaining to this
world and the Hereafter (Ṭs).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:69:18 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 69:18 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
Ɗ That Day you shall be exposed; no secret of yours shall be hidden.18
You shall be exposed translates tuʿraḍūn, which could also be rendered“you shall be brought forth,” as in 11:18: And who does greater wrong than one
who fabricates a lie against God? It is they who will be brought before their
Lord (yuʿraḍū ʿalā rabbihim
). In this vein, a ḥadīth states, “The people are
brought forth on the Day of Resurrection for three arraignments (ʿarḍāt
): during
the first two arraignments, they will argue and make excuses; at the third, the
scrolls will be cast into their hands; so some will take with their right hand and
others will take with their left” (IK, Q, R, Ṭ). No secret of yours shall be hidden
indicates either that nothing is hidden from God, as in 40:16, the Day when they
come forth with naught concerning them hidden from God, or that the inner
states and thoughts of human beings will now be known, and the result will be
that the believers will rejoice and the disbelievers will grieve (R). This phrase
can also be translated, “None among you shall be hidden” (Q), meaning that no
human being can evade God’s Judgment.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:71:intro | source STUDYQURAN | verses 71:1-28 | introduction to surah 71 ===
71NoahNūḥNūḥ is most likely from the middle Makkan period. It is one
of four sūrah
s named after an Old Testament prophet; the
others are Yūnus, “Jonah,” Yūsuf, “Joseph,” and Ibrāhīm,“Abraham.” Although it takes the name of Noah, this sūrah
does not tell his entire story. Other aspects of the story can be
found in 7:59–64; 10:71–73; 11:25–48; 21:76–77; 23:23–30;
26:105–21; 29:14–15; 37:75–82; 54:9–15. Nonetheless, a
complete chronicle cannot be patched together from these
various fragments, since the function of Quranic accounts of
the prophets and sacred history is not to provide a historical
record, but to provide guidance, as stated in 11:120: All that We
recount unto thee of the stories of the messengers is that
whereby We make firm thine heart. And herein there has come
unto thee the truth, and an exhortation and a reminder for the
believers.
Although the Biblical account provides details about the
construction of the Ark (Genesis 6:12–16) and Noah’s life after
the flood (Genesis 9), the Quran focuses almost entirely upon
Noah’s function as a warner who called his people to guidance
and their subsequent rejection of him. The flood with which
God punishes those who opposed Noah is mentioned or
alluded to in most of the accounts, but it receives no more than
one line in any of them. This indicates that God’s Punishment
is not the focus of the Quranic account; instead, like accounts
of other prophets, such as Abraham and Jesus, the Quranic
account of Noah emphasizes God’s Mercy and Guidance.
Despite the fact that Noah’s people refuse to respond to
repeated calls to follow God, God continues to grant them
respite and does not send the flood until they have completely
rejected his calls. In this respect, the story can be seen both as a
call to those who opposed the Prophet Muhammad to let them
know that God’s Mercy remains open to them, but that they
will perish if they do not avail themselves of the guidance He
has sent, and as a reminder to the Prophet Muhammad that
messengers before him, such as Noah and Lot, have met with
even greater defiance than he encountered.
Along with Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, Noah is
considered one of the resolute among the messengers (46:35),
who are presented to the Prophet Muhammad as examples to
follow and among whose ranks Muslims consider Muhammad
to be. According to some, Noah was the first messenger sent
by God (those before him are considered prophets rather than
messengers; for this distinction see the essay “The Quranic
View of Sacred History and Other Religions”), and he was
sent, like Muhammad, to the entire world, rather than to a
specific people (Q).
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful


<<end of chunk>>
