<<chunk 734 part 0 of 0..1>>
=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:58:translation | source STUDYQURAN | verses 58:1-22 | translation of surah 58 (verse medallions shown as (S:A)) ===
(58:1) God has indeed heard the words of she who disputes with thee
concerning her husband and complains to God. And God hears your
conversation. Truly God is Hearing, Seeing. (58:2) Those among you who
commit ẓihār against their wives, those are not their mothers. None
are their mothers save those who gave birth to them. Truly they speak
indecent words and calumny. And truly God is Pardoning, Forgiving.(58:3) As for those who commit ẓihār against their wives and then go
back on what they have said, let them free a slave before they touch
one another; to that are you counseled. And God is Aware of
whatsoever you do. (58:4) And whosoever finds not [the means], let him
fast two consecutive months before they touch one another. And
whosoever is unable, let him feed sixty indigent people. That is so that
you may believe in God and His Messenger. These are the limits set
by God, and the disbelievers shall have a painful punishment. (58:5)
Truly those who oppose God and His Messenger shall be abased, just
as those before them were abased. We have indeed sent down clear
signs, and the disbelievers shall have a humiliating punishment (58:6) on
the Day when God resurrects them all together, then informs them of
that which they did. God has kept account of it while they have
forgotten it; and God is Witness over all things. (58:7) Hast thou not
considered that God knows whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is on the earth? There is no secret converse among three,
but that He is their fourth, nor among five, but that He is their sixth,
nor less than that, nor more, but that He is with them wheresoever
they are. Then on the Day of Resurrection He will inform them of that
which they did. Truly God is Knower of all things. (58:8) Hast thou not
seen those who were forbidden from secretly conversing then returned
to that which they had been forbidden, secretly conversing with a
view to sin, enmity, and disobeying the Messenger? And when they
come to thee and greet thee, they greet thee in a manner that God has
not greeted thee and say within themselves, “Why does God not
punish us for what we say?” Hell suffices them, burning therein. What
an evil journey’s end! (58:9) O you who believe! If you converse in
secret, then do not converse in secret with a view to sin, enmity, and
disobeying the Messenger; converse in secret with a view to piety and
reverence. And reverence God, unto Whom you shall be gathered. (58:10)
Secret converse is only from Satan, so that those who believe may
grieve; yet he harms them not a whit, save by God’s Leave. And in
God let the believers trust. (58:11) O you who believe! When it is said unto
you, “Make room for one another in the assemblies,” then make room,
and God will make room for you. And when it is said, “Rise,” then
rise, and God will raise in degrees those among you who believe and
those who have been given knowledge. God is Aware of whatsoever
you do. (58:12) O you who believe! When you converse in secret with the
Messenger, offer charity before your secret converse. That is better for
you and purer. But if you do not find [the means], truly God is
Forgiving, Merciful. (58:13) Are you apprehensive about offering charity
before your secret converse? If you do not do so and God relents unto
you, then perform the prayer, give the alms, and obey God and His
Messenger. God is Aware of whatsoever you do. (58:14) Hast thou not
seen those who befriend a people with whom God is wroth? They are
not of you, nor are you of them. And they knowingly swear upon
falsehood. (58:15) God has prepared for them a severe punishment. Evil
indeed is that which they used to do. (58:16) They took their oaths as a
shield and thus turned from the way of God; so theirs shall be a
humiliating punishment. (58:17) Neither their property nor their children
will avail them aught against God. They are the inhabitants of the
Fire, abiding therein. (58:18) On the Day when God resurrects them all,
they will swear to Him just as they swear to you, supposing that they
have some standing. Lo! Truly they are the liars. (58:19) Satan has
overwhelmed them, and so made them forget the remembrance of
God. They are the party of Satan. Lo! The party of Satan are losers. (58:20)
Truly those who oppose God and His Messenger, they will be among
the abased. (58:21) God has decreed, “I shall surely prevail, I and My
messengers!” Truly God is Strong, Mighty. (58:22) You shall not find a
people who believe in God and the Last Day loving those who oppose
God and His Messenger, even if they be their fathers, their sons, their
brothers, or their tribe. God has inscribed faith upon their hearts and
strengthened them with a Spirit from Him. He causes them to enter
Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein, God being
content with them and they being content with Him. They are the
party of God. Truly the party of God—it is they who shall prosper.

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:58:6 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 58:6 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
j on the Day when God resurrects them all together, then informs
them of that which they did. God has kept account of it while they
have forgotten it; and God is Witness over all things.6
The beginning of this verse is either a clause modifying humiliating
punishment or the object of an implied verb, “mention” or “remember” (
udhkur),
which would mean, “Remember” or “make mention of the Day when God will
gather every human being on an open, barren plain for judgment” (see 18:47c;
20:106; 39:69–70c; 79:14c). God keeps account of people’s deeds in a book or
registry that is then presented to them on the Day of Judgment, whereupon the
disbelievers say, “Oh, woe unto us! What a book this is! It leaves out nothing,
small or great, save that it has taken account thereof.” And they find present
[therein] whatsoever they did (18:49; see also 6:59; 17:13–14). For God is
Witness over all things, see also 4:33; 5:117; 22:17; 33:55; 34:47; 41:53; 85:9.
Elsewhere it is said that God is Witness over what you do (see, e.g., 3:98).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:59:9 | source STUDYQURAN | verses 59:9 | the verse quoted, then the commentary ===
| And those who were settled in the land and in belief before them
love those who emigrated to them and find in their breasts no need for
that which they were given. They prefer others over themselves, even
if they be impoverished. And whosoever is shielded from the avarice
of his soul, it is they who shall prosper.9
In the land refers to Madinah, and those who were settled . . . in belief
before them refers to the Muslims of Madinah who had embraced Islam before
the arrival of the Prophet and the Emigrants from Makkah. This verse was
reportedly revealed in relation to an incident in which the Prophet entrusted one
of the People of the Veranda (the poor who lived outside the Prophet’s Mosque
in Madinah; see 2:273c) to a man from the Helpers. The Helper took the man to
his family and asked his wife, “Do we have anything [to feed him]?” She said,“We do not have anything except the children’s food.” He said, “Put them to
sleep, and then bring me the food. And when you put the food down, turn the
lamp off.” He then offered what he had to his guest. The following morning he
took him back to the Messenger of God. The Prophet said, “Truly the dwellers of
the heavens are amazed at what you two have done.” This verse was then
revealed (IK, W). They prefer others over themselves is related to those verses
that praise giving wealth despite loving it (2:177; 76:8). Find in their breasts no
need has broader implications, as it indicates removing this world from one’s
heart, so that the heart is no longer attached to what passes it by (Aj). In this
vein, a ḥadīth states, “Abstain from the world, and God will love you; abstain
from what pertains to other people, and the people will love you.” Whosoever is
shielded from the avarice of his soul (cf. 64:16) thus describes those who feel no
need for what is destined for others and are thereby protected, as in anotherḥadīth, “Your worst enemy is the soul between your two sides.” In this same
vein, the Prophet warned his followers, “Be on your guard against committing
oppression, for oppression is a darkness on the Day of Resurrection. Be on your
guard against avarice, for avarice is what destroyed those who were before you.
It made them shed blood and make lawful that which was unlawful for them”(IK).

=== SEGMENT STUDYQURAN:62:intro | source STUDYQURAN | verses 62:1-11 | introduction to surah 62 ===
62The Congregational Prayer
al-JumuʿahA
lthough a minority maintain that al-Jumuʿah is a Makkan
sūrah, internal indicators, such as the reference to the Jews in
v. 6, affirm that it is from the Madinan period (Āl). It takes its
name from the exhortation to gather for the Friday
congregational prayer in v. 9 and is the fourth in the group of
sūrah
s known as “The Glorifiers” (
al-Musabbiḥāt
), which
begin with a reference to the glorification of God; the other
sūrah
s are 57, 59, 61, and 64. This sūrah is connected to the
previous sūrah by the manner in which both compare the
commerce of this world with the affairs of the next. Some also
liken the praise for those who fight in His way in ranks in the
previous sūrah (61:4) to the call to attend the congregational
prayer, as Muslims are also called to stand in ranks during
prayer (Āl).
The Prophet is reported to have often recited this sūrah and
the following sūrah, al-Munāfiqūn, together during the
congregational prayer on Fridays (Āl). According to a ḥadīth,“The best day over which the sun has risen is the day of the
congregational prayer (
al-jumuʿah
); on it did God create
Adam, and on it did Adam enter the Garden, and on it was he
removed from the Garden. And the Hour will not come save on
the day of the congregational prayer” (Q). According to
another ḥ
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
