<<chunk 5, part 0 of 0..3>>
{"id": "1:1/q10", "question": "From what is ٱللَّهِ derived?", "turns_on": "Whether Allāh is an underived proper name or a contracted or otherwise derived form.", "positions": [{"id": "1:1/q10/p1", "position": "Allāh derives from al-ilāh or ilāh through loss of hamza and assimilation.", "reasons": "TAB (author): Allah’s form comes from al-ilāh: the initial hamza is dropped, then the two lām sounds meet and assimilate into one doubled lām. TAB-FULL (author): Ṭabarī proposes that Allāh derives from al-ilāh: the initial hamza is dropped and the adjacent lām sounds assimilate into one doubled lām. THALABI (أهل الكوفة): The Kufans derive Allah from ilāh: the definite article magnified the name, then the hamza dropped through frequent use and the two lām letters assimilated. MAWARDI-FULL (author): A second view derives Allah from ilāh: the hamza is dropped and the pronunciation intensified. JISHUMI (سيبويه): One derivation takes Allah from ilāh, dropping the hamza and making the alif-lām an obligatory substitute so the name becomes a proper name. KASHSHAF (author): Allah derives from al-ilah, with hamza removed; al-nas likewise derives from al-unas, with the hamza replaced by the article. IBNATIYYA (author): Three accounts explain the change from ilah to Allah: irregular loss of hamza before alif-lam, alif-lam added to ilah with hamza-vowel transfer and lam assimilation, or an original lah; Ibn Atiyya favors the first. IBNATIYYA (الخليل): Al-Khalil says the original was ilah or walah, with hamza substituted for waw as in ishaḥ/wishaḥ and isadah/wisadah. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Several analyses explain the development from ilah to Allah through deletion or movement of the hamza and attachment of the article; the author judges the first explanation strongest. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الخليل): Al-Khalil reports that ilah/walah began with wāw, with hamza substituted as in ishaḥ/wishaḥ and isādah/wisādah. RAZI-FULL (الكوفيون): The Kufans derive Allah from ilāh with the article for glorification, then explain loss of hamza and assimilation of the two lām letters. QURTUBI (الخليل وسيبويه): Al-Khalīl and Sibawayh derive Allah from ilāh, with the article replacing hamza, as nās derives from unās. BAYDAWI (author): Allāh is said to derive from ilāh, with hamza deleted and replaced by the article; ilāh originally meant any deity but came to designate the true deity. NASAFI (author): Allah derives from al-ilah, like al-nas from al-unas: the hamza drops and the definite article substitutes for it. Ilah once named any true or false object of worship, then chiefly the true one; Allah without hamza is exclusive to the true God. NASAFI-FULL (author): Allah is uniquely the name of the true God, not an attribute; the source derives it from al-ilah with hamza loss, while Khalil, al-Zajjaj, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, and al-Husayn ibn al-Fadl deny derivation and other accounts link it to bewilderment or worship. SAMIN-DURR (author): On the al-ilah derivation, hamza is dropped through frequent use, like anās becoming nās; an alternative account transfers its vowel before deletion. IBNKATHIR (الخليل وسيبويه): Al-Khalil and Sibawayh derive the word from ilah, with the article replacing an initial hamza, by analogy with al-nas from unas; another proposal takes it from lah for exalted. IBNKATHIR (الكسائي والفراء): Al-Kisaʾi and al-Farraʾ derive it from al-ilah, with the hamza dropped and the two lams assimilated, like lakinna from lakin ana. | mentions 18:38 IBNKATHIR (author): The proposed form begins as al-ilah; deleting the hamza brings two lams together, which assimilate and are pronounced as one emphatic doubled lam. ALUSI (author): Authorities derive Allāh either from al-ilāh or ilāh with hamza loss and compensatory alif-lām; Ibn Mālik instead argues for a distinct root and original proper name. ALUSI (ابن مالك): Ibn Mālik denies that Allāh derives from al-ilāh, arguing their forms and meanings differ and that deletion or hamza transfer lacks a sound morphological parallel. ALUSI-FULL (الصحاح والكشاف): The lexicons differ between deriving Allah from al-ilāh and ilāh; al-Alusi says the hamza was most likely dropped without a regular cause and replaced by the article. ELMALILI (Kûfiyyûn): The Kufans derive Allah from al-ilāh, with the article becoming integral and its hamza compensating for the elided hamza of ilāh; ilāh is linked to worship, awe, tranquility, or release from fear. TABATABAI (author): Allah derives from al-ilah, with the hamza dropped through frequent use; the root can mean worship or bewilderment, and the name was already familiar among pre-Islamic Arabs. | mentions 43:87, 6:136"}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p2", "position": "Allāh is linked to bewilderment or the root walah.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI (author): Another etymology derives Allah from walah, with initial wāw changed to hamza like wishāḥ/ishāḥ: people flee to God in hardship and need as a child clings to its mother. BAGHAWI (author): A further explanation derives it from walah as loss of reason at losing someone dear. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Another explanation derives walah from bewilderment: minds are bewildered by the realities of God's attributes and by thought about knowing him. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (غيره): Another etymology derives Allāh from wālah, with initial wāw changed into hamza, as in wisāda and wishāḥ becoming ishāḥ. QURTUBI (الخليل): Another proposal derives ilāh from walah, bewilderment, because minds are overwhelmed by God’s attributes. BAYDAWI (author): A further proposal derives it from walaha, bewilderment, with wāw changed to hamza under kasra; Bayḍāwī objects that its plural is āliha, not awliha. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عمر): Abū ʿUmar derives Allah from a root meaning to be bewildered. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): Some derive the name from walah, bewilderment, by turning waw into hamza; al-Alusi objects that the plural and sound changes do not support this derivation."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p3", "position": "The Basrans derive Allah from lāh with the definite article, citing a verse that preserves the alleged original form.", "reasons": "THALABI (أهل البصرة): The Basrans derive Allah from lāh with the definite article, citing a verse that preserves the alleged original form. RAZI-FULL (البصريون): The Basrans derive Allah from lāh with the article and cite a poem for the original form."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p4", "position": "Allāh is linked to a non-Arabic word.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI (author): Another proposal derives the word from Syriac lāhā, arabized by dropping the final alif and adding lām. ELMALILI (Ebû Yezîd-i Belhî): Abū Yazīd al-Balkhī regards laah as foreign because Jews and Christians say laha, and some relate it to Hebrew Elohim; the author says chronology cannot establish borrowing and cognate forms may share an older source."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p5", "position": "Al-Naḍr derives Allah from a root meaning to worship.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (النضر): Al-Naḍr derives Allah from a root meaning to worship. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (المبرد): Al-Mubarrad derives Allah from a root meaning to be at rest."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p6", "position": "The contraction is comparable to “lākinn huwa Allāh rabbī” from “lākinn anā huwa Allāh rabbī,” and to the poem’s “lākinn iyyāki” from “lākinn anā iyyāki.”", "reasons": "TAB (author): The contraction is comparable to “lākinn huwa Allāh rabbī” from “lākinn anā huwa Allāh rabbī,” and to the poem’s “lākinn iyyāki” from “lākinn anā iyyāki.”"}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p7", "position": "The contraction is comparable to the Qurʾānic form lakinnā from wa-lākin anā, illustrated by a poet’s similar elision and assimilation.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The contraction is comparable to the Qurʾānic form lakinnā from wa-lākin anā, illustrated by a poet’s similar elision and assimilation. | mentions 18:38"}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p8", "position": "Another account says the definite article replaced the deleted hamza and therefore remains inseparable; this explains why one cannot say “yā ayyuhā Allāh.”", "reasons": "THALABI (بعضهم): Another account says the definite article replaced the deleted hamza and therefore remains inseparable; this explains why one cannot say “yā ayyuhā Allāh.”"}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p9", "position": "Another derivation is from elevation, since lāh means to rise.", "reasons": "THALABI (قوم): Another derivation is from elevation, since lāh means to rise."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p10", "position": "A derivation from dwelling in a place gives the sense of the eternally abiding and enduring.", "reasons": "THALABI (قوم): A derivation from dwelling in a place gives the sense of the eternally abiding and enduring."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p11", "position": "Another view derives Allah from aliha, with the hamza dropped and the word pronounced emphatically.", "reasons": "MAWARDI (unattributed): Another view derives Allah from aliha, with the hamza dropped and the word pronounced emphatically."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p12", "position": "Al-Khalīl and Abū ʿAlī regard Allah as an un-derived name; not every word must be derived, or derivation would regress without end.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (الخليل وأبي علي): Al-Khalīl and Abū ʿAlī regard Allah as an un-derived name; not every word must be derived, or derivation would regress without end."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p13", "position": "In the vocative, Allah keeps its hamza pronounced separately, as in ya ilah.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): In the vocative, Allah keeps its hamza pronounced separately, as in ya ilah."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p14", "position": "Allah without hamza is uniquely the name of the true God and is never applied to another.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Allah without hamza is uniquely the name of the true God and is never applied to another."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p15", "position": "Allah, with its hamza deleted, is uniquely the name of the true God and is not used for another being; verbs meaning to deify derive from it.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Allah, with its hamza deleted, is uniquely the name of the true God and
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
