<<chunk 5, part 2 of 0..3>>
deriving the divine name from lāh, to be elevated or hidden.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (ميمون بن قيس الأعشى): A line attributed to Maymun ibn Qays al-Aʿsha, containing lāhahu al-kibār, is cited as evidence for deriving the divine name from lāh, to be elevated or hidden."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p45", "position": "The distinctive Arabic use of the name Allah supports its status as a unique proper name, though whether the initial alif-lām is an inseparable article and how its hamza behaves remain debated.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): The distinctive Arabic use of the name Allah supports its status as a unique proper name, though whether the initial alif-lām is an inseparable article and how its hamza behaves remain debated."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p46", "position": "A proposed compound of Hebrew El and Syriac or Arabic laah fails linguistic tests: a foreign or compound word should be indeclinable, and the proposed hamza and vowel do not match Allah’s form.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): A proposed compound of Hebrew El and Syriac or Arabic laah fails linguistic tests: a foreign or compound word should be indeclinable, and the proposed hamza and vowel do not match Allah’s form."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p47", "position": "Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Bayḍāwī, and other investigators accept the al-ilāh analysis; its meanings are gathered in the true object of worship, and the plural pattern āliha supports the proposed root.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (Zemahşerî, Kādî Beyzâvî): Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Bayḍāwī, and other investigators accept the al-ilāh analysis; its meanings are gathered in the true object of worship, and the plural pattern āliha supports the proposed root."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p48", "position": "The two derivational analyses both preserve an original Arabic meaning in the name, though some posit a foreign origin followed by complete Arabization.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): The two derivational analyses both preserve an original Arabic meaning in the name, though some posit a foreign origin followed by complete Arabization."}, {"id": "1:1/q10/p49", "position": "Some consider Allāh a unique word without a root; others derive it from al-Ilāh, meaning the Divine.", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN (author): Some consider Allāh a unique word without a root; others derive it from al-Ilāh, meaning the Divine."}]}
{"id": "1:1/q11", "question": "Is ٱللَّهِ a proper, underived name?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "1:1/q11/p1", "position": "Allāh is a proper name for God's unique essence, not a derived description.", "reasons": "THALABI (الخليل بن أحمد وجماعة): Al-Khalil and others say Allah is a proper name, not derived; the verse “Do you know any namesake for Him?” supports its unique reference. | mentions 19:65 MAWARDI (unattributed): One view treats Allah as an un-derived proper name for the divine essence, needed as the name to which attribute names attach. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One view treats Allah as a proper name for the divine essence, not derived from an attribute, since attribute names depend on an essence name. WAHIDI-QT (author): Allah is a name unique to the Creator, functioning like a proper name and having no known derivation. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Allah is God's unique proper name, functioning like a proper name among His names, with no known derivation. BAGHAWI (الخليل): Al-Khalil and others treat Allah as a proper name specific to God, not derived, like human names Zayd and ʿAmr. BAGHAWI-FULL (الخليل وجماعة): Al-Khalil and a group treat Allah as a proper name unique to God, with no derivation, like human proper names. KASHSHAF (author): Allah is a proper name, not an attribute; it is predicated of things but does not describe them, and divine attributes require a named subject. IBNATIYYA (فرقة من أهل العلم): One group of scholars treats Allah as an un-derived proper name, with alif-lam integral to the name rather than a marker of definiteness. TABRISI (الخليل): Al-Khalil treats Allah as an un-derived proper name, arguing that not every word must have a derivation or derivation would regress forever. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (العلماء): Scholars disagree whether the divine name Allāh is derived or an underived proper name. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الخليل): One view attributed to al-Khalīl says Allāh is not derived and its alif-lām cannot be dropped as it can from al-Raḥmān. RAZI-FULL (author): The closest view is that 'Allah' is the greatest name because it functions as a proper name for God and denotes His unique essence. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi says Allah is a proper name, then asks whether that name itself signifies the divine attributes. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi's chosen view is that Allah is a proper name for God, not a derivative; he attributes it to al-Khalīl, Sībawayh, and most legal theorists and jurists. RAZI-FULL (author): If Allah were derived, it would denote a general concept open to many bearers, making “There is no god but Allah” fail to establish exclusive monotheism; its established force proves it is a proper name. RAZI-FULL (author): A proper name normally precedes descriptive predicates; likewise speakers say “Allah, the Knowing, the Powerful,” not the reverse. RAZI-FULL (author): The apparent counterexample in Ibrahim 14:1 has two readings: nominative makes Allah a new subject, while genitive identifies which praised one is meant rather than making a proper name into an adjective. | mentions 14:1 RAZI-FULL (القائلون بأنه ليس اسم علم): Opponents argue that “He is Allah in the heavens” and “He is Allah” use Allah predicatively, unlike a proper name such as Zayd. | mentions 6:3, 59:22 RAZI-FULL (author): Most accept the word as Arabic; those who deny that Allah is a proper name divide between Kufan and Basran derivations. RAZI-FULL (author): The report supports taking “Allah” as a proper name for God's unique essence, since a derived general noun could not identify that individual essence; “All-Merciful” and “Merciful” are universal terms. QURTUBI (الشافعي وأبو المعالي والخطابي والغزالي): Al-Shāfiʿī, al-Juwaynī, al-Khaṭṭābī, and al-Ghazālī treat Allah as a non-derived proper name with inseparable alif-lām. BAYDAWI (author): One view makes Allāh the unique proper name: it is described but not itself descriptive and uniquely names the one whose attributes are predicated. ABUHAYYAN (الأكثرون): Most authorities consider Allāh a proper name for the true deity only, originally un-derived. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأكثرون): Most authorities treat Allah as a proper name for the true deity and regard it as non-derived. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A rare theological-linguistic position calls Allah an attribute rather than a proper name, since the divine essence is not grasped directly and is known through attributes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (السهيلي): Al-Suhaylī considers raḥmān an epithet of praise, despite its functioning like a proper name, since people ask what raḥmān means but do not ask what Allah means. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says Allah became a proper name through common usage prevailing over other uses. IBNKATHIR (author): Allah is the proper name of the Lord and is called the Greatest Name because all the other attributes are predicated of Him. | mentions 59:22, 59:23, 59:24, 7:180, 17:110 IBNKATHIR (الشافعي والخطابي وإمام الحرمين والغزالي والخليل وسيبويه): These scholars regard Allah as an underived, fixed proper name; al-Khattabi argues that the vocative “ya Allah” works, whereas “ya al-Rahman” does not. IBNKATHIR (فخر الدين الرازي): Al-Razi chooses Allah as an underived proper name; he argues that if it were derived, others could share its meaning, while the other names function as attributes. ALUSI (السيد السند والسعد والرضي): Al-Sayyid, al-Saʿd, and al-Raḍī differ on whether al-ilāh is generic or already exclusive, and whether Allāh became a proper name through deletion or assimilation. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī favors Allāh as an Arabic proper name for the essence encompassing every attribute, following major theologians and the Naqshbandī tradition. ALUSI-FULL (السعد): Al-Saʿd distinguishes al-ilāh as the general concept of the deity worshiped in truth from Allah as the proper name of God. ALUSI-FULL (أكابر المعتبرين): Most major authorities, including al-Shafiʿi, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, al-Ashʿari, al-Khalil, and Sibawayh, regard Allah as Arabic and originally a proper name for God’s unique essence. ALUSI-FULL (author): One proof that Allah is a proper name is that it can be described but is not itself used as a description; an apparent counterexample is treated as apposition. | mentions 34:6 ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi prefers Allah as an original proper name for the essence encompassing all attributes; a name acquired only through dominance has less force and dignity. | mentions 112:1 ELMALILI (author): Allah denotes the divine essence as a special name or proper name: it can signify a mental concept that points to God or name the uniquely specified reality itself. ELMALILI (author): Allah may be glossed as the true object of worship or creator of all, yet the unified meaning people hear in Allah is clearer and more complete than those definitions, making the proper-name analysis compelling. ELMALILI (author): Tanrı, hudā, ilāh, rabb, and maʿbūd are common nouns that can refer to false or multiple gods, so these terms cannot translate the unique proper name Allah. ELMALILI (Ebû Hayyân-ı Endelüsî): Abū Ḥayyān says the majority consider Allah an un-derived, primordial proper name for the true God. ELMALILI (İmam Fahreddin Râzî): Al-Rāzī’s preferred position is that Allah is God’s proper name and not originally derived; al-Khalīl, Sībawayh, many legal theorists, and jurists agree. ELMALILI (author): The author concludes that Allah is neither derived nor transferred but was assigned primordially as a proper name; God precedes all names and attributes, and His worship-worthiness derives from Himself rather than from being worshipped. ELMALILI (author): Removing the participle still leaves Allah's proper name insufficient
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
