<<chunk 13, part 1 of 0..5>>
 first despite its greater force.", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL (author): Rahman is restricted as a name to God but universal in meaning, while Rahim can describe others and is particular in its referent; Rahman is nevertheless placed first despite its greater force."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p26", "position": "Because Allah is the proper name encompassing the beautiful names, al-Raḥmān precedes al-Raḥīm: it is exclusive to Him and more intensive, so the stronger description comes first.", "reasons": "BIQAI (author): Because Allah is the proper name encompassing the beautiful names, al-Raḥmān precedes al-Raḥīm: it is exclusive to Him and more intensive, so the stronger description comes first."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p27", "position": "Allah is a proper name encompassing all beautiful names; Rahman precedes Rahim because it is exclusive and more emphatic, following the order of existence, general mercy, then worship-specific mercy.", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL (author): Allah is a proper name encompassing all beautiful names; Rahman precedes Rahim because it is exclusive and more emphatic, following the order of existence, general mercy, then worship-specific mercy."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p28", "position": "Proposed reasons for placing al-Raḥmān first include its encompassing major blessings, al-Raḥīm completing lesser ones, or preserving verse-end rhyme; al-Ālūsī rejects rhyme alone.", "reasons": "ALUSI (author): Proposed reasons for placing al-Raḥmān first include its encompassing major blessings, al-Raḥīm completing lesser ones, or preserving verse-end rhyme; al-Ālūsī rejects rhyme alone."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p29", "position": "The scholar of al-Kashf says the sequence follows a descending order: Allah names the essence, Rahman universal mercy and existence, and Rahim each being’s particular share and perfections.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (العلامة المدقق في الكشف): The scholar of al-Kashf says the sequence follows a descending order: Allah names the essence, Rahman universal mercy and existence, and Rahim each being’s particular share and perfections."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p30", "position": "Humans cannot assign a direct proper name before experiencing a manifestation of the essence; the Qurʾān first introduces God through name-manifestations, and Rahmān and Rahīm initially unfold the name Allah.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Humans cannot assign a direct proper name before experiencing a manifestation of the essence; the Qurʾān first introduces God through name-manifestations, and Rahmān and Rahīm initially unfold the name Allah."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p31", "position": "The phrase moves from the pure name Allah to the name-and-attribute Rahmān and then the pure attribute Rahīm, gradually unfolding God’s name in the heart as the first manifestation of divine beauty.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): The phrase moves from the pure name Allah to the name-and-attribute Rahmān and then the pure attribute Rahīm, gradually unfolding God’s name in the heart as the first manifestation of divine beauty."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p32", "position": "Al-Bayḍāwī says the supplicant names God’s essence to show aid is sought from Him, then invokes al-Raḥmān for His favors and al-Raḥīm for further reasons discussed later.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR (البيضاوي): Al-Bayḍāwī says the supplicant names God’s essence to show aid is sought from Him, then invokes al-Raḥmān for His favors and al-Raḥīm for further reasons discussed later."}, {"id": "1:1/q31/p33", "position": "The order Allāh, al-Raḥmān, al-Raḥīm can symbolize Essence, unity of Attributes, and unity of divine acts, respectively.", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN (author): The order Allāh, al-Raḥmān, al-Raḥīm can symbolize Essence, unity of Attributes, and unity of divine acts, respectively."}]}
{"id": "1:1/q32", "question": "Is the basmala a verse of al-Fātiḥa?", "turns_on": "Whether a Qurʾānic opening verse belongs to al-Fātiḥa itself or stands outside its verse count.", "positions": [{"id": "1:1/q32/p1", "position": "The basmala is a verse of al-Fātiḥa.", "reasons": "TAB (عظم أهل الكوفة): Most Kufan authorities count basmala as one of Fātiḥa’s seven verses; also transmitted from Companions and Successors. THALABI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās identifies the seven oft-repeated verses as al-Fātiḥa and counts the basmala as its seventh verse. | mentions 15:87 IBNATIYYA (الشافعي): Al-Shafi'i counts the basmala as a verse of al-Fatiha. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The Jabir and Abu Hurayra reports would imply that the basmala is a verse of al-Fatiha if sound. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Tha‘labi transmits a version in which the Prophet counted the basmala as a complete verse of al-Fatiha; when reports conflict, affirmation outweighs omission. QURTUBI (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī counts the basmala in al-Fātiḥa but has two positions about other sūras. BAYDAWI-FULL (أم سلمة): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet counted the basmala as a verse when reciting al-Fātiḥa. IBNKATHIR (أم سلمة): A report from Umm Salama says the Prophet recited and counted the basmala as a verse at the start of the Fatiha; Ibn Kathir notes the chain is weak because of ʿUmar ibn Harun. BURHAN (author): Al-Shafiʿi counts the basmala and makes the rest of 1:7 one verse; Abu Hanifa omits the basmala and divides its two phrases. Both count seven verses, but al-Shafiʿi's division better preserves the endings because anʿamta ʿalayhim does not match prior endings. DURR (النبي): The Prophet says to recite the basmala with al-Hamd, calls al-Fatiha the Mother of the Qur'an and seven oft-repeated verses, and counts the basmala as an ayah. DURR (علي): Ali identifies al-Hamd as the seven oft-repeated verses and counts the basmala as the seventh ayah. DURR (أم سلمة): Umm Salama says the Prophet recited al-Fatiha verse by verse and counted the basmala as an ayah. DURR-FULL (محمد بن كعب القرظي): Muhammad ibn Kab al-Qurazi counts the basmala as part of al-Fatiha's seven verses. ITQAN (أم سلمة): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet recited al-Fatiha verse by verse, counted the basmala as a verse, and did not count “ʿalayhim”; al-Suyuti says this supports the majority's seven-verse count. ITQAN (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet counted the basmala as a verse in his recitation of the opening sūra, but did not count عليهم as one. ALUSI (بعض الشافعية وحمزة): Some Shāfiʿīs and Ḥamza, with a view attributed to Aḥmad, count the basmala as a verse of al-Fātiḥa alone. ALUSI (أم سلمة): A report attributed to Umm Salama has the Prophet count the basmala as al-Fātiḥa’s first verse; al-Ālūsī questions the chain because Abū Mulayka’s hearing from her is unestablished. ALUSI (ابن خزيمة والحاكم): Their version has the Prophet count the basmala as a verse while reciting in prayer; al-Ālūsī reads it as the first Qurʾānic verse, not necessarily al-Fātiḥa’s. ALUSI-FULL (أم سلمة): A report attributed to Umm Salama has the Prophet count the basmala as the first Fatiha verse and the following phrases as the next verses. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi presents Razi's eighth proof: Shafii counts the basmala, while Abu Hanifa counts sirat alladhina anamta alayhim; Razi calls the Hanafi count weak and says seven verses require the basmala."}, {"id": "1:1/q32/p2", "position": "The basmala is not a verse of al-Fātiḥa.", "reasons": "TAB (عظم قرأة أهل المدينة ومتقنيهم): Most leading Medinan reciters exclude basmala from the seven and count those You favored as seventh verse. TAB-FULL (author): Ṭabarī argues the basmala is not a verse of the Opening: otherwise al-Raḥmān al-Raḥīm would repeat immediately, word for word and sense for sense, without an intervening divider. KASHSHAF (قراء المدينة والبصرة والشام وفقهاؤها): Medina, Basra, and Syrian readers and jurists hold that the basmala is not a verse of al-Fatiha or any surah. QURTUBI (مالك): Mālik says the basmala is not a verse of al-Fātiḥa or other sūras, though it is Qurʾān in al-Naml. | mentions 27:30 QURTUBI (author): Since the basmala is not an al-Fātiḥa verse on the preferred view, prayer moves directly from takbīr to al-Fātiḥa without pause or opening supplication. NASAFI (author): Since the division report begins with al-hamdu lillah, Nasafi takes it as evidence that the basmala is not part of the Fatiha; he says it is not part of another sura either, by consensus. | mentions 1:2 NASAFI-FULL (author): The report begins God's response when the servant says “Praise belongs to God,” which indicates the basmala is not part of al-Fatiha; if it is outside al-Fatiha, consensus excludes it from other surahs too. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مكي): Makkī argues that repeating raḥmān-raḥīm proves the basmala is not a Fātiḥa verse, since two adjacent verses with the same sense would lack a separating ending. IBNKATHIR (مالك وأبو حنيفة وأصحابهما): Malik, Abu Hanifa, and their followers say the basmala is not a verse of the Fatiha or any other surah. ELMALILI (author): The Shāfiʿī argument concludes that even if the basmala is not a whole verse of al-Fātiḥa, it is part of a verse, making its recitation obligatory and audible in prayer."}, {"id": "1:1/q32/p3", "position": "The basmala is an independent Qurʾānic verse outside al-Fātiḥa.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR (داود وأحمد): Dawud and one narration from Ahmad treat the basmala as an independent opening verse of each surah, not part of the surahs. IBNKATHIR (author): Scholars differ over whether the basmala is an independent opening verse, part of a verse, or not counted as part of the Fatiha. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī says the Hanafi position treats the basmala as an independent Qurʾānic verse, not part of al-Fātiḥa, while many Hanafis require its recitation in prayer. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): The statement identifying the Fatiha's seventh verse as the basmala is Ibn Abbas's own, not necessarily a Prophetic report; he may have reasoned that an independent Qur'anic verse belongs in the Fatiha. ELMALILI (author): The sound Ḥanafī position reconciles the other arguments: each opening basmala is an independent Qurʾānic ve
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
