<<chunk 19, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "1:1/q43", "question": "Should the basmala be recited aloud in prayer?", "turns_on": "The transmitted prayer practice and the strength and interpretation of its reports.", "positions": [{"id": "1:1/q43/p1", "position": "The basmala is recited aloud in prayer.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): The author says reciting the basmala aloud in prayer is sunnah, citing commands to read in the Lord’s name and to remember the Lord’s name when praying. | mentions 96:1, 87:15 THALABI (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report relayed by al-Mahdī from his father and grandfather, Ibn ʿAbbās, says the Prophet recited the basmala aloud. THALABI (عطاء وطاوس ومجاهد): Al-Layth reports that ʿAṭāʾ, Ṭāwūs, and Mujāhid recited the basmala aloud. JISHUMI (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī holds that it should be recited aloud. JISHUMI (أنس): Anas says he heard neither the Prophet nor Abū Bakr nor ʿUmar recite the basmala aloud in prayer. KASHSHAF (قراء مكة والكوفة وفقهاؤهما): Because they count it as a verse, this group recites it aloud in prayer. KASHSHAF-FULL (قراء مكة والكوفة وفقهاؤهما): They hold that the basmala is a verse of al-Fatiha and every surah; al-Shafi'i and his companions agree and recite it aloud. IBNATIYYA (أبو هريرة عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Hurayra reports that Gabriel taught the Prophet prayer and recited the basmala aloud. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra reports that Gabriel taught the Prophet prayer and recited the basmala aloud. TABRISI (الصادق): Al-Sadiq condemns those who call the basmala an innovation when they recite it aloud, calling it the greatest verse in God's Book. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī recommends reciting the basmala aloud; this view is also reported from Muʿāwiya, ʿAṭāʾ, Ṭāwūs, and Mujāhid. RAZI-FULL (author): When Muawiya omitted the basmala aloud in prayer, the Migrants and Helpers rebuked him and he repeated the prayer; Razi takes this as Companion consensus that it is Quran and part of al-Fatiha, and that aloud recitation is preferable. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi holds loud recitation to be Sunna: if the sura is recited aloud, its opening basmala should be too, rather than making only part of a sura audible. RAZI-FULL (علي بن أبي طالب): Ali is reported to recite the basmala aloud in all prayers, a practice Razi says strongly confirms public recitation. RAZI-FULL (author): Since Muawiya was powerful, the Companions’ public protest shows that aloud basmala recitation was established among them. RAZI-FULL (البيهقي): Al-Bayhaqi transmits Abu Hurayra’s report that the Prophet recited the basmala aloud, and reports the same practice from Umar, Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umar, and Ibn al-Zubayr. RAZI-FULL (علي بن أبي طالب): Razi says Ali’s loud recitation is established by mass transmission; he cites the report asking God to keep truth with Ali wherever he turns. RAZI-FULL (أبو حامد الإسفراييني): Abu Hamid al-Isfarayini groups six Anas reports: three support the Hanafi position by omitting the basmala, while three contrary reports recount the protest against Muawiya, loud recitation, or Anas’s uncertainty. RAZI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shafi‘i later answers the Umar report by citing al-Sha‘bi that Umar repeated the prayer, or by suggesting he omitted aloud recitation rather than recitation itself. QURTUBI (عبادة بن الصامت): ʿUbāda reports that the Prophet prohibited followers from reciting aloud except al-Fātiḥa; al-Tirmidhī grades it ḥasan. QURTUBI (عمر بن الخطاب): Al-Dāraquṭnī authenticates the report that ʿUmar ordered recitation behind an imam, even when ʿUmar recited aloud. NASAFI (قراء مكة والكوفة والشافعي وأصحابه): Meccan and Kufan reciters and al-Shafi‘i’s school count the basmala as a verse of the Fatiha and every sura, and recite it aloud; they argue the early Muslims wrote it in the Qur’an despite orders to exclude non-Qur’anic material. NASAFI-FULL (author): Meccan and Kufan readers, with al-Shafi'i and his companions, count it as a verse of al-Fatiha and every surah and recite it aloud; they cite its inclusion in the early codices despite the instruction to exclude non-Qur'anic material. IBNKATHIR (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi recites the basmala aloud with both Fatiha and the following surah when opening prayer; many early and later authorities also did so. IBNKATHIR (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra recited the basmala aloud and said his prayer most resembled the Prophet's; Ibn Kathir cites several scholars who authenticated the report. DURR (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says the Prophet first recited the basmala aloud in Mecca, then concealed it after Meccans linked al-Rahman to Musaylima. DURR (عبد الله بن مغفل): Ibn Abd Allah ibn Maghfal says his father objected to his reciting aloud, having heard none of the first caliphs do so behind the Prophet. DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas calls loud recitation of the basmala Bedouin-style recitation. DURR (إبراهيم): Ibrahim calls an imam's loud recitation of the basmala an innovation. DURR (النبي): Abu Hurayra reports Gabriel taught the Prophet prayer and he recited the basmala aloud in every rak'a. DURR (العَبَادِلَة): A report says Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umar, and Ibn al-Zubayr began recitation aloud with the basmala. DURR (النبي): Reports from Ali, Ammar, Ibn Umar, Abu Hurayra, Anas, al-Nu'man, Hakam, and Aisha attest that the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in prayer. DURR (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra reports the Prophet recited the basmala aloud during prayer. DURR (أنس): Anas reports the Prophet recited the basmala aloud. DURR (علي): Ali reports the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in both suras. DURR (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar says the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar recited the basmala aloud. DURR (النعمان بن بشير): Al-Nu'man ibn Bashir says Gabriel led the Prophet at the Kaaba and recited the basmala aloud. DURR (الحكم بن عمير): Hakam ibn Umayr says the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in night, dawn, and Friday prayers. DURR (عائشة): Aisha reports the Prophet recited the basmala aloud. DURR-FULL (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra reports that the Prophet taught prayer and recited the basmala aloud in every rakah. DURR-FULL (أبو هريرة): A report says Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umar, and Ibn al-Zubayr began recitation aloud with the basmala. DURR-FULL (علي وعمار): Ali and Ammar say the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in obligatory prayers at the opening of al-Fatiha. DURR-FULL (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra says the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in prayer. DURR-FULL (علي): Ali reports that the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in both surahs. DURR-FULL (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar says the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar recited the basmala aloud. DURR-FULL (النعمان بن بشير): Al-Numan ibn Bashir says Gabriel led the Prophet in prayer at the Kaaba and recited the basmala aloud. DURR-FULL (الحكم بن عمير): Al-Hakam ibn Umayr says the Prophet recited the basmala aloud in night, dawn, and Friday prayers. DURR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha reports that the Prophet recited the basmala aloud. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas calls aloud recitation of the basmala the Bedouin style of recitation. DURR-FULL (إبراهيم): Ibrahim says an imam's aloud recitation of the basmala is an innovation. ALUSI (عبد الله بن المغفل): Ibn al-Mughafal recounts his father’s objection to audible basmala, saying the Prophet and first caliphs began aloud with al-Ḥamd; al-Ālūsī infers they concealed the basmala. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī says the explicit sound evidence for audible recitation is limited; reports of occasional loud recitation can demonstrate that it is read without making it habitual. ALUSI-FULL (الفخر الرازي): Razi cites the report that companions challenged Mu'awiya for omitting the basmala in a public prayer and he repeated it aloud. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi says only Ibn Abbas's report explicitly supports loud recitation; it conflicts with earlier reports or may describe occasional public demonstration that the basmala is recited. ALUSI-FULL (الفخر الرازي): Razi's second argument says the basmala is praise and glorification and therefore should be spoken aloud, citing the command to remember God intensely. | mentions 2:200 ALUSI-FULL (الفخر الرازي): Razi's fifth proof cites a Bayhaqi report of the Prophet reciting the basmala aloud, also attributed to Umar, his son, Ibn Abbas, Ibn al-Zubayr, and Ali, and says following Ali is guidance."}, {"id": "1:1/q43/p2", "position": "The basmala is recited silently in prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Shafi'i says the basmala is a verse of al-Fatiha and must be read; Malik and al-Awza'i exclude it except in the Quran's Naml passage, with a Ramadan-night exception, while Abu Hanifa orders quiet recitation without stating its status. | mentions 27:30 RAZI-FULL (أحمد بن حنبل): Ahmad ibn Hanbal is reported to count the basmala as a verse of al-Fatiha while reciting it quietly in every rak‘a; al-Shafi‘i counts it and recites aloud, while Abu Hanifa does not count it but reads it quietly. RAZI-FULL (أبو حنيفة): For those who do not count the basmala as a verse of al-Fatiha, Abu Hanifa and several other jurists require it quietly; Malik forbids it in obligatory prayer but permits a choice in voluntary prayer. QURTUBI (حمزة): Readers pronounce seeking refuge aloud at al-Fātiḥa’s start except Ḥamza, who recites it quietly. QURTUBI (أبو هريرة الفارسي): Abū Ḥātim says the imam-responsibility report supports reading behind an imam; Abū Hurayra al-Fārisī advised quiet recitation. QURTUBI (author): Qurṭubī reads “Why do I hear the Qurʾān contested?” as forbidding loud competing recitation, not silent reading. QURTUBI (أبو حنيفة والثوري): Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Thawrī, Aḥmad, and others recite the basmala quietly with al-Fātiḥa. QURTUBI (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports not hearing the Prophet recite the basmala aloud; Qurṭubī prefers quiet recitation to reconcile the reports. IBNKATHIR (مالك): Malik does not recite the basmala in prayer either aloud or quietly, relying on reports that the Prophet and first caliphs began with al-Hamd and did not mention it. IBNKATHIR (author): The legal disagreement is narrow: scho
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
