<<chunk 23, part 15 of 0..15>>
 displays blessings and makes gratitude audible. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Qurʾān 34:13 uses shukr for action, supporting the broader usage of gratitude beyond speech. | mentions 34:13"}, {"id": "1:2/q01/p7", "position": "Ḥamd and madḥ share the same sense.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī equates ḥamd and madḥ, while gratitude is for gifts by heart, tongue and limbs; verbal praise reveals gifts and is called gratitude's head. KASHSHAF-FULL: The full commentary links ḥamd and madḥ, gratitude's broader means, a weak head-of-gratitude report, and the nominative's enduring force. KASHSHAF-FULL: The full commentary links ḥamd and madḥ, gratitude's broader means, a weak head-of-gratitude report, and the nominative's enduring force. KASHSHAF-FULL: The full commentary links ḥamd and madḥ, gratitude's broader means, a weak head-of-gratitude report, and the nominative's enduring force. KASHSHAF-FULL: The full commentary links ḥamd and madḥ, gratitude's broader means, a weak head-of-gratitude report, and the nominative's enduring force. KASHSHAF-FULL: The full commentary links ḥamd and madḥ, gratitude's broader means, a weak head-of-gratitude report, and the nominative's enduring force. Al-Bayḍāwī reports that some equate ḥamd and madḥ, while shukr answers a blessing through speech, action, and belief."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
