<<chunk 24, part 2 of 0..2>>
cribing the camels. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Some tie the generic reading to the Muʿtazilī account that human actions belong to their agents; al-Ālūsī replies that good acts still depend on God’s enabling and empowering. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The suggestion that ʿālamīn is a unique collective noun on the pattern of sound plurals does not settle its form; the author distinguishes ordinary plurals, collective generics, and collective nouns. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): He prefers genus because its exclusivity follows directly from the wording and logically entails exclusivity of every instance, making the proof stronger than separately asserting total scope. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): He challenges the claim that genus exclusivity is immediately apparent: its inference is too subtle to be the obvious reading, and the manuscript ends while he disputes the argument’s rhetorical strength. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The definite article in al-ḥamdu is taken here to indicate the familiar genus of praise, illustrated by a line of Labīd about the wild asses and their she-asses. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The lām in lillah denotes entitlement, particularity, and ownership; the whole genus and every form of hamd belongs to God. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The nominative makes a nominal sentence for permanence, the generic article broadens it, and fronting highlights it; the accusative construction cannot convey all three effects. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The name derives from al-ilah, definite form of ilah, a generic word for deity; ilah is linked to worship or states entailing humble reverence and follows a passive fa'al pattern like kitab. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Hamd is praise for a chosen beautiful quality, whether an action such as generosity or another quality such as courage; thana' is its broader genus. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The al in al-hamd is generic: because the verbal noun stands in place of an action, the definite form presents the kind of praise as familiar and makes it prominent, rather than identifying one instance. KASHSHAF: Al-Zamakhsharī rejects exhaustive totality."}, {"id": "1:2/q02/p4", "position": "The article denotes praise's essence.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A second grammatical view says the definite noun denotes only the essence or nature of praise, not universal scope. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): For Nasafi, the definite article in al-hamd is comprehensive, against the Mu‘tazila; its attachment to Allah, the name of the divine essence, gathers all perfections and reflects the doctrine of created acts. BIQAI, d. 885 (author): Al-ḥamd lillāh establishes that God deserves every praise by His essence and all perfections; Rabb adds that He deserves praise as Lord, Owner, and Benefactor. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Allah is the proper name of the necessarily existent essence, worthy of every praise. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Exhausting all genera entails their individuals, since lordship over abstract essences makes no sense; the plural with the definite article explicitly signals comprehensive scope. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Allah is the proper name of the necessarily existent divine essence, the one deserving every praise."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
