<<chunk 24, part 1 of 0..2>>
 an exhaustive, subtle order among surahs, stories, verses, words, and letters; analyzing it involves innumerable sciences, beginning with grammar and rhetoric. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The cited grammar says a definite source such as al-hamdu can be raised as a subject because it is declarative and definite; the sense of the omitted verb remains. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): A reading with al-hamda in the accusative and definite article is a Tamimi dialect form attested by Sibawayhi; its implied verb limits praise to the speaker or intended group. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Although anomalous, the accusative reading documents an Arabic stage in this familiar construction, showing that some speakers retained its absolute-object origin even with the article. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The nominative is more eloquent than the accusative, and definite accusative is more expressive than indefinite accusative; raising marks permanence and stability. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari rejects treating the article as grammatically exhaustive; Ibn Ashur agrees that it marks genus, while the construction's combined effect entails all praise. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The genus article with the possessive l am implies all praise belongs to God: if any instance belonged to another, exclusive possession of the genus would fail; this is hyperbolic restriction. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The lam in li-llah may mean figurative exclusive possession or strengthen the verbal noun's relation as a weak, derived construction; exclusivity is also conveyed by the two definite parts. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Arabs do not appear to have used definite singular al-ilah for an idol: they used a possessive construction, another title, or the plural alihah. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Calling Allah with ya while retaining the definite article shows that speakers treat the article as part of the name, unlike ordinary nouns entered by al. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (الجوهري عن سيبويه): Another proposed derivation takes Allah from laah, a verbal noun meaning to be hidden; the article was added to suggest the original sense, as in fadl and majd used as names. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A second proposal derives the name from wilah, 'overwhelmed and bewildered'; initial waw became hamza after kasra, then the article was added and hamza dropped. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A further etymology borrows Syriac laaha as a divine name, Arabized by removing its final alif and adding the article. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): In this rhetorical context the definite article is exhaustive: there is no external or mental antecedent and no suitable literal or generic reading, so all genera are included. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The plural prevents an antecedent or generic reading and explicitly indicates exhaustive scope; Ibn Ashur rejects the Sakaki school's claim that singular is more comprehensive, referring to 2:31 for discussion. | mentions 2:31 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayh says some such source expressions can be made nominative topics, as in al-hamdu lillah; the definite form favors this declarative use. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Raising hamd creates a nominal sentence for permanence, generic al for comprehensive praise, and fronting for emphasis; these effects are unavailable in the ordinary accusative construction. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Accusative hamd can take al in the Tamim reading, but an implicit “I praise” limits praise to the speaker and “we praise” to believers or monotheists; generic hamd instead includes every praise. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur says the nominative definite wording is most eloquent, conveys enduring and comprehensive praise, and cites al-Kashshaf's comparison with Abraham's greeting at 51:25. | mentions 51:25 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Although the generic article is not itself exhaustive, its combination with the lām of divine specification implies that every instance of praise belongs to God; the restriction is rhetorical and emphatic. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The lām in lillah can indicate rhetorical specification or strengthen the relation of the verbal-noun subject to its predicate; specification remains conveyed by the definiteness of both parts. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur finds no evidence that Arabs used the definite singular al-ilah for an idol; they used a possessive phrase, often rabb, or a plural, and a conquest report speaks of idols in the Kaaba. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The divine name became a unique proper form whose article is treated as part of the word, as the vocative يا الله shows; its formation has no parallel among ordinary names. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الجوهري عن سيبويه): One proposed origin is لاه, a verbal noun meaning that God is hidden, with the definite article added to suggest the original sense. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The article in العالمين is exhaustive because the context supplies neither an external nor mental referent; it therefore covers every relevant species and, by implication, its individuals. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The plural العالمين makes exhaustive scope explicit and removes a possible generic or familiar reading; Ibn Ashur rejects the claim among al-Sakkaki's followers that an exhaustive singular is broader than an exhaustive plural. | mentions 2:31 TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Hamd praises voluntary excellence, while madh is broader and can praise non-voluntary qualities; the definite article here yields the same result whether generic or comprehensive. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Since God is beautiful in names and acts and all praised beauty comes from Him, every true act of praise is rightfully His. | mentions 20:8, 7:180 ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): With the definite article, rabb is used in the Qur'an exclusively for God, sole sustainer of all creation and ultimate authority. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The verse's wording is preferable to the alternatives madḥ, shukr, I/we praise, an imperative, accusative praise, an indefinite praise, inna, fronted lillah, or a divine attribute. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (بعضهم): Others take the article as generic and exhaustive, covering every kind and instance of praise. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Arabic particles can shift a phrase between invocation and report, as رحمه الله and رزقك الله differ from their versions introduced by قد. STUDYQURAN (author): The definite form al-ḥamd indicates that all praise and gratitude belong to God. Al-Ālūsī: genus, generic instance, and comprehensiveness are possible in principle, but this context calls for all praise because every perfection ultimately comes from God."}, {"id": "1:2/q02/p2", "position": "The article points to known praise.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): One grammatical view makes definite al-ḥamd refer to a prior known instance, or otherwise to all praise to avoid ambiguity. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): The article in al-ḥamd may be anaphoric, defining the familiar praise; essential, defining the nature; or generic, encompassing all praises. A verbal noun is ordinarily not pluralized. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The definite article on ḥamd may indicate a known instance, the abstract quality, or the entire genus of praise; the last implies exhaustive praise. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The article in al-hamd is analyzed as universal, generic, or referring to known praise; al-Zamakhshari chooses the generic reading. ALUSI, d. 1270 (أبو العباس المرسي): Al-Mursī says the article is covenantal because God praised Himself eternally on behalf of creatures unable to encompass His praise, supported by the prophetic supplication that He is as He praised Himself. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو العباس المرسي): Al-Fākihī reports that Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Mursī told Ibn al-Naḥḥās the article is referential: God praised Himself eternally on creatures’ behalf because they could not praise Him adequately. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The definite article in alhamd can express a known instance, totality, kind, or essence; because no particular hamd is presupposed, it here gathers the entire genus and all its ranks. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The article in al-hamd marks a known genus: its referent is recognizable to speaker and hearer, making the expression emphatic rather than singling out one instance. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): An alam is a genus among existing things; the word may derive from knowledge or sign because each genus is distinguishable and serves as a sign by which it is known. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (التفتزاني): Al-Taftazani says alam names knowledgeable beings or each genus through which the Creator is known; singular alam normally needs a qualifying genitive, while 'the entire cosmos' is later theological terminology. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamdu lillah is a nominal and definite expression, unlike hamdan lillah; al can indicate known praise or all praise, while indefiniteness lacks this scope. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (بعضهم): Some take the definite article in الحمد as referring to the known praise among its hearers. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The author favors the exhaustive sense, supported by the Prophetic prayer اللهم لك الحمد كله: all known praise belongs to God without exception."}, {"id": "1:2/q02/p3", "position": "The article denotes the genus of praise.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Ḥamd is a verbal noun normally governed by an implicit, rarely used verb; its article may denote the genus or point to the familiar idea of praise. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): A prepositional phrase or adverb functioning as clause predicate, relative clause, adjective, or circumstantial phrase has an omitted governor; a generic kā'in cannot be overt except in a poetic anomaly. | mentions 27:40 ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī takes the article in al-ḥamdu as generic: it points to the familiar notion of praise, as in Labīd’s verse des
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
