<<chunk 25, part 4 of 0..5>>
e rather than an adjective. ALUSI, d. 1270 (هارون بن موسى): Hārūn b. Mūsā reads al-ḥamda in the accusative, a construction common among Arabs for a definite verbal noun with an implied verb such as نحمد. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The implied verb for the accusative is in the first-person plural, matching naʿbudu and nastaʿīn and the humility of worship, rather than a majestic first-person singular. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (هارون بن موسى): Hārūn b. Mūsā reads al-ḥamda in the accusative, like Arabs who use definite verbal nouns with an omitted verb; the implied “we praise” suits worship and seeking help better than royal “we.” | mentions 1:5 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Some grammarians say verbal nouns are originally accusative because events require predication; the underlying verbal relation is normally expressed by a verb, making the noun-plus-verb construction seem redundant. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (زيد بن علي): A reading attributed to Zayd ibn ʿAli puts Rabb al-ʿalamin in the accusative; al-Alusi finds the first grammatical explanation, an implied praise or mention verb, most apparent. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعضهم): One analysis treats the accusative as an adjective cut off from its antecedent, supplying an implied verb such as I praise or I mention; an objection about the following adjective is answered by taking Rahman as apposition. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو حيان): Abu Hayyan rejects deriving the accusative from the earlier praise merely by attraction, arguing that this mechanism belongs to coordination; al-Alusi disputes that objection using grammatical authorities. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi considers an accusative absolute construction the strongest and nearly compelled by the apparent wording. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The relation between the basmala and Fatiha unfolds the primordial covenant between the eternal Lord and c reation, inscribing a relation already present in human nature. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Fatiha proceeds as instruction; the command to read in the name of the Lord is a key contextual sign of this teaching purpose. | mentions 96:1 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Nothing lies outside the basmala's attraction, so it relates generally to al-Fatiha as one recites, writes, praises, or begins the Quran in its name. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Al-Fatiha is Meccan and has seven verses; Muslims recite it at least seventeen times daily, more with voluntary prayers, and may repeat it without limit. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayhi explains that praise expressions originally use an omitted verb in the absolute accusative, as in 'we praise God with praise'; the verbal noun replaces the verb. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Sibawayhi distinguishes supplicatory accusative sources from declarative ones such as hamdan and shukran, whose omitted verbs mean 'I praise' or 'I thank'. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari also describes hamd's original accusative with an omitted verb and its shift to nominative as a means of indicating stability. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The nominative makes a nominal sentence for permanence, the generic article broadens it, and fronting highlights it; the accusative construction cannot convey all three effects. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): A reading with al-hamda in the accusative and definite article is a Tamimi dialect form attested by Sibawayhi; its implied verb limits praise to the speaker or intended group. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Raising hamd announces praise from the speaker and all creation, whereas the accusative announces only the speaker's praise. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Although anomalous, the accusative reading documents an Arabic stage in this familiar construction, showing that some speakers retained its absolute-object origin even with the article. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The nominative is more eloquent than the accusative, and definite accusative is more expressive than indefinite accusative; raising marks permanence and stability. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari compares the nominative 'peace' in 51:25 with the earlier accusative greeting: Abraham answers with a more enduring, better greeting. | mentions 51:25 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He reads the sura's annexation to Fatihat al-Kitab as descriptive: it means a sura characterized as the Book's opening, with no separate title needed. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): On this reading, mathani in al-Fatiha resembles the repeated narratives and themes in the Qur'an called mathani in al-Zumar. | mentions 39:23 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains conventional verbal nouns such as “beware” or “thanks” as accusatives governed by verbs suppressed from use, and distinguishes supplicatory formulas from other expressions. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-hamdu is nominative in all transmitted readings; its predicate is lillah, while an underlying analysis treats hamd as an accusative verbal noun replacing an omitted verb meaning “we praise God.” IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Raising hamd creates a nominal sentence for permanence, generic al for comprehensive praise, and fronting for emphasis; these effects are unavailable in the ordinary accusative construction. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Accusative hamd can take al in the Tamim reading, but an implicit “I praise” limits praise to the speaker and “we praise” to believers or monotheists; generic hamd instead includes every praise. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayh's distinction is that nominative hamd reports praise from the speaker and all creatures, while accusative hamd reports the speaker's praise alone. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The nominative reading al-hamdu makes a nominal sentence and is stronger and more enduring than the accusative, which requires an implied verb. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (البحر المحيط): The seven readers agree on the nominative, which establishes praise; the accusative requires an implied agent and makes praise actor-specific and renewed. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Even if the accusative is read as an imperative, commanding praise does not establish that the praised one deserves it; the nominative indicates deserved, established praise. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The verse's wording is preferable to the alternatives madḥ, shukr, I/we praise, an imperative, accusative praise, an indefinite praise, inna, fronted lillah, or a divine attribute. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The nominative reading الحمدُ لله makes a stable nominal sentence; the accusative requires an implied verb and yields a verbal sentence or command, so the nominative is stronger. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Even if the accusative is construed as a command to praise, a command does not establish that its object deserves praise; the declarative nominative is preferable. STUDYQURAN (author): Shiite law permits reciting the Fātiḥah in the third and fourth cycles or an alternative formula praising God. STUDYQURAN (author): Muslims recite the Fātiḥah at diverse life events; funeral services are called fātiḥah in some lands as an opening from one life to another."}, {"id": "1:2/q03/p3", "position": "The dāl of al-ḥamd is read with kasra.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (الحسن بن أبي الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Hasan and Zayd ibn ʿAli reportedly read the dal with kasra by assimilating its vowel to the following word. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (ابن السميفع): Ibn al-Sumayfa reads al-ḥamda with fatḥa on dāl and kasra on lām. QURTUBI, d. 671 (الحسن بن أبي الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan ibn Abī al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī read the dāl of al-ḥamd with kasra by assimilation of the first vowel to the second. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن بن أبي الحسن): Hasan al-Basri and Zayd ibn ʿAli read the dāl with kasra by vowel assimilation. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (الجمهور): The majority read al-ḥamdu with ḍamma on the dāl. Ibrāhīm ibn Abī ʿAbla assimilates its mīm to the following lām; al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī assimilate the dāl's kasra to the lām's, a stranger assimilation. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī assimilate the dāl's kasra to the lām's kasra; the author calls this stranger because a case vowel follows a non-case vowel. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī harmonize the dāl's kasra with the lām's kasra, a stranger kind of agreement between inflectional and non-inflectional vowels. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The kasra in a variant al-hamdi may be vowel harmony with the following lām, a Tamim and some Ghatafan dialect feature; another possibility is hidden nominative or accusative inflection. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Hasan and Zayd ibn Ali read the dāl with kasra by assimilating the first vowel to the second. NASHR, d. 833 (الحسن البصري): Al-Hasan reads the dāl of al-ḥamdulillāh with kasra; Ibn al-Jazari says both this and the preceding form are linguistically distant, explained as vowel-following. NAHHAS: Al-Ḥasan and Ibrāhīm readings and Tamīm/Rabīʿa vowel harmony are discussed. NAHHAS: Al-Ḥasan and Ibrāhīm readings and Tamīm/Rabīʿa vowel harmony are discussed. NAHHAS: Al-Ḥasan and Ibrāhīm readings and Tamīm/Rabīʿa vowel harmony are discussed. KASHSHAF-FULL: Al-Ḥasan assimilates it to lām."}, {"id": "1:2/q03/p4", "position": "The lām follows the dāl in ḍamma.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abi ʿAbla reportedly reads both dal and lam with ḍamma, assimilating the second to the first. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الجمهور): Most readers pronounce the lām of lillāh with kasra; Ibn ʿAbla uses ḍamma, a dialect of some Rabīʿa according to al-Farrāʾ. QURTUBI, d. 671 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abī ʿAbla reads the dāl and lām with ḍamma by vowel assimilation for phonetic harmony, a common pattern illustrated by other words and a poetic line. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abi ʿAbla reads the dāl and lām with ḍamma for vowel harmony, a common Arabic tendency also illustrated by other readings and poetic examp
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
