<<chunk 25, part 5 of 0..5>>
les. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): A poem’s “wayl ummiha” derives from “waylun li-ummiha”: the first lām was dropped and the hamza’s ḍamma shifted after kasra proved heavy. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abi Abla reads both dāl and lām with ḍamma by assimilating the second vowel to the first; Ibn Kathir calls the reading anomalous. NASHR, d. 833 (إبراهيم بن أبي عبلة): Ibrahim b. Abi Ablah reads the first lām in al-ḥamdulillāh with ḍamma. KASHSHAF-FULL: Ibrāhīm's reading is preferred because of the strong inflectional vowel. KASHSHAF-FULL: Ibrāhīm's reading is preferred because of the strong inflectional vowel."}, {"id": "1:2/q03/p5", "position": "Arabic speech also attests other vowel combinations in al-ḥamdu lillāh.", "reasons": "FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. FARRA: Al-Farrāʾ records Bedouin vowels, accusative verbal-noun construction, vowel harmony from frequent use, and Abū Tharwān's contracted vocative poetry; 47:4 and 12:79 illustrate omitted verbs. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī records nominative, accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma readings with their syntactic or phonetic explanations. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī records nominative, accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma readings with their syntactic or phonetic explanations. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī records nominative, accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma readings with their syntactic or phonetic explanations. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī records nominative, accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma readings with their syntactic or phonetic explanations. JISHUMI: The text lists standard, assimilated and noncanonical forms, including Zayd's rabb form, and notes agreement on rabb's kasra. JISHUMI: The text lists standard, assimilated and noncanonical forms, including Zayd's rabb form, and notes agreement on rabb's kasra. JISHUMI: The text lists standard, assimilated and noncanonical forms, including Zayd's rabb form, and notes agreement on rabb's kasra. JISHUMI: The text lists standard, assimilated and noncanonical forms, including Zayd's rabb form, and notes agreement on rabb's kasra. KASHSHAF: Al-Ḥasan reads kasra, Ibrāhīm rounds lām, and al-Zamakhsharī prefers Ibrāhīm because inflection controls lexical vowel. KASHSHAF: Al-Ḥasan reads kasra, Ibrāhīm rounds lām, and al-Zamakhsharī prefers Ibrāhīm because inflection controls lexical vowel. KASHSHAF: Al-Ḥasan reads kasra, Ibrāhīm rounds lām, and al-Zamakhsharī prefers Ibrāhīm because inflection controls lexical vowel. IBNATIYYA: The seven read nominative; reports give accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA: The seven read nominative; reports give accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA: The seven read nominative; reports give accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA: The seven read nominative; reports give accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA-FULL: It records the seven's nominative and reported accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA-FULL: It records the seven's nominative and reported accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA-FULL: It records the seven's nominative and reported accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma. IBNATIYYA-FULL: It records the seven's nominative and reported accusative, kasra and double-ḍamma."}, {"id": "1:2/q03/p6", "position": "Both connected vowels are read with kasra.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو نهيك): Abū Nuhayk reads both dāl and lām in al-ḥamd lillāh with kasra."}, {"id": "1:2/q03/p7", "position": "The divine name is read with imāla.", "reasons": "NASHR, d. 833 (قتيبة عن الكسائي): Qutayba transmits imāla of the alif in lillāh from al-Kisa'i, explained by the following kasra. NASHR, d. 833 (قتيبة عن الكسائي، كردم عن نافع، ورش): The author adds unlisted transmissions: Qutayba from al-Kisa'i has imāla in al-ʿālamīn and al-raḥmān; Kurram from Nafi and al-Ahwazi from Warsh lengthen vowels in mālik, naʿbudu, and iyyāka."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
