<<chunk 25, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:2/q03", "question": "How is al-ḥamd read?", "turns_on": "How Arabic dialects treat case vowels and assimilation between the two frequently joined words.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q03/p1", "position": "Al-ḥamd is read nominative.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): The same implied-command reading continues with “Say, You alone”; the author notes that Arabic often omits words clear from context. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (القراء السبعة وجمهور الناس): The seven canonical readers and most people pronounce the dal of al-hamdu with nominative case. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (سفيان بن عيينة ورؤبة بن العجاج): Sufyan ibn ʿUyayna and Ruʾba reportedly read the dal with fatḥ, implying an omitted verb. TABRISI, d. 548 (الأخفش وأبو علي الفارسي): They parse al-ḥamdu as a nominative subject with an omitted predication such as is due or is established for God; the phrase lillah supplies its meaning. TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni says kasra on ḥamd and ḍamma on lillah signal a close subject-predicate bond, making the two parts sound like one word. TABRISI, d. 548 (سيبويه): The lām normally has fatḥa because it cannot begin with sukun; lām of possession and emphasis are distinguished, and attached pronouns restore its original opening vowel. TABRISI, d. 548 (سيبويه): The kasra of lām in the jussive verb li-yafʿal distinguishes it from emphatic lām. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Another account says the plural nūn is opened because kasra after waw or yā is heavy, like in sawfa and ayna. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Readers agree on ḍamma in al-ḥamdu and kasra in lillāh; three noncanonical vowel combinations are also transmitted. TABRISI, d. 548 (زيد بن علي): Zayd ibn Ali's fatḥa on the bā of rabb is understood as demonstrating that the form is possible, not as a recitation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Al-ḥamd is nominative as the subject and lillāh its predicate: praise is established and belongs to God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو رزين العقيلي والربيع بن خيثم وأبو عمران الجوني): These readers pronounce the bāʾ of rabb in the nominative. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): In the mystical reading, guidance brings light to the heart, the blessed become polished mirrors reflecting sanctity, and the final plea seeks protection from desire and doubt. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi reads Lord of the worlds as an argument for the ancient God's existence; the created lights, darkness, and angels are kinds within that all-encompassing world-order. | mentions 6:1, 35:1 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Most scholars require recitation in prayer, while al-Asamm and al-Hasan b. Salih deny that recitation is obligatory. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The command to perform the dawn recitation in Quran 17:78 is a command to read and therefore makes recitation obligatory. | mentions 17:78 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو الدرداء عن النبي): A man asked the Prophet whether prayer includes recitation; when the man concluded that it was obligatory, the Prophet approved him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن مسعود عن النبي): In another report, the Prophet answers a question about reciting in prayer by asking whether there can be prayer without recitation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الأصم): Al-Asamm argues that the Prophet described prayer as things seen, whereas recitation is not visible and must therefore fall outside prayer; Razi answers that seeing with two objects means knowing. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If the hadith must be figurative, invalidity is nearer than mere incompleteness because a nonexistent act resembles an invalid act more than a valid but imperfect one; presumption, prohibition, and caution reinforce this reading. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Although belief in obligation may itself leave theoretical doubt, actual recitation creates no danger while omission creates fear of failing the duty; therefore action is the safer course. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi reports disagreement over the minimum recitation for Hanafis: Abu Hanifa accepts one verse, even isolated letters, while Abu Yusuf and Muhammad require three short verses or one long verse. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Rāzī rejects supplying an unspoken command ‘say’: the phrase is already a complete assertion that praise belongs to God. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Allah is nobler than Lord, although supplicants commonly call God ‘Lord’; al-Rāzī refers readers to his earlier discussion of the divine names. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The rightly guided caliphs also consistently recited it, and the Prophet commanded Muslims to follow their sunna. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Muslims everywhere recite it in prayer, and the Qur'an commands following the path of believers. | mentions 4:115 QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Given that usage, the report’s wording may be read as aʿḍalat al-malakayn or ʿaḍḍalat al-malakayn without a preposition. QURTUBI, d. 671 (جعفر الصادق): Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq gives a symbolic reading of the letters: ḥāʾ signifies unity, mīm dominion, and dāl permanence; knowing these is knowing God. QURTUBI, d. 671 (غير سيبويه): Another explanation takes the nominative as an appeal for pardon and as exaltation and glorification, so it functions as supplication rather than a plain report. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (جعفر الصادق): Jaʿfar al-Sadiq offers an esoteric reading of the letters of hamd: unity, dominion, and permanence; knowing these attributes is the reality of praising God. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Other grammarians take the phrase as an appeal for pardon and mercy, magnification, or a request rather than a plain report; anot her reading teaches people to say it. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Readings assimilate dāl and lām in opposite directions, treating the letters as one word because they are used together. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): The nominative conveys universal and permanent praise belonging to God rather than newly arising praise. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Two recitations assimilate the dāl and lām in either direction, treating them as one word because the terms are used together. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): A report calls praise the head of gratitude and says a servant has not thanked God without praising Him; verbal mention spreads notice of a favor more than inward belief or ambiguous bodily acts. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (القراء السبعة): The nominative reading is stronger and agreed upon by the seven canonical readers: it states that praise is established and enduringly belongs to God, including praise by God and others. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers that al-ʿālamīn denote morally responsible beings, supported by the verse about signs for the knowledgeable; Ḥafṣ's kasra on the lām clarifies the sense. | mentions 30:22 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الجمهور): The majority pronounce the dāl of al-ḥamdu with ḍamma. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The nominative reading is semantically stronger and unanimously adopted by the Seven because it states that praise is established for God. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Although al-ʿālamīn is an irregular plural, Abū Ḥayyān favors the responsible creatures because a cited verse and Ḥafṣ's lām-kasra reading support that scope. | mentions 29:44 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو رزين العقيلي والربيع بن خيثم وأبو عمران الجوني): Abū Razīn, al-Rabīʿ ibn Khuthaym, and Abū ʿImrān al-Jūnī read both epithets in the nominative as detached clauses. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The article in al-hamd is analyzed as universal, generic, or referring to known praise; al-Zamakhshari chooses the generic reading. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari rejects the universal reading; the author infers that praise here is performed by the servant, who cannot produce every praise by himself and others. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The common reading raises al-hamd as subject with a deleted nominal predicate, the preferred estimate, though a verb can also be supplied. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): A variant with damma on the lām of li-llah follows the preceding dāl; al-Zamakhshari prefers harmony from inflection to building, citing a Qays dialect and Qur'anic murdifin. | mentions 8:9 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): “Qur'an of dawn” in 17:78 means the dawn prayer, as the sound reports say angels of night and day witness it; scholars agree prayer requires recitation. | mentions 17:78 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (القراء السبعة): The seven canonical readers vocalize the dāl of al-ḥamdu with ḍamma, making al-ḥamdu a subject and li-llāhi its predicate. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Companion al-Aswad ibn Sari asks to recite praises of his Lord, and the Prophet replies that his Lord loves praise. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (الله تعالى): In a divine report, God divides the prayer between Himself and His servant, responds to each recited section, calls 1:5 shared between them, and grants the servant's request. NASHR, d. 833 (author): Maki deems these noncanonical-imam readings permissible when reliably transmitted, since each has a sound Arabic analysis and agrees with the codex spelling; Ibn al-Jazari says others also share some forms. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Harali explains the sound report that God divided prayer between Himself and His servant: the first three verses are God's praise, which He accepts from the reciting servant as praise and glorification. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The passage names al-Baqara 2:281 as the last revealed verse and says its recitation position between the debt verse and the verse before it shows revelation and recitation order can differ. | mentions 2:281, 75:17 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Recitation order can differ from revelation chronology; the verse allowing the Prophet to marry certain women was placed before a later restriction. | mentions 33:50, 33:52 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): He offers two readings of the merciful names: universal mercy permits created benefits while specific mercy protects from harm; he says the nearer reading is general lordly beneficence and a special divine mercy directed to fel
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
