<<chunk 26, part 3 of 0..3>>
dicate huwa rabb. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (سفيان بن عيينة ورؤبة بن العجاج): Sufyan ibn Uyaynah and Ru'bah ibn al-Ajjaj read al-ḥamda with fatḥa as an implied verbal object. NASHR, d. 833 (زيد بن علي بن الحسين، رؤبة بن العجاج، هارون بن موسى العتكي، الحسن): These readers pronounce the dāl of al-ḥamdu with fatḥa; the accusative is treated as a verbal noun with its commonly understood verb omitted. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو زيد سعيد بن أوس الأنصاري): Abu Zayd reports rabb al-ʿālamīn in both nominative and accusative; successive adjectives may differ, with some governed by an implied verb and others by an implied subject, but not revert to genitive. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Al-ḥamdu li-llāh is read with nominative case as a subject, accusative as a verbal noun, or genitive by vowel assimilation. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Rabb al-ʿālamīn is read genitive as an adjective, nominative with an implicit subject, or accusative with an implicit verb or as a vocative. ALUSI, d. 1270 (زيد بن علي): Zayd b. ʿAlī is reported to read rabb al-ʿālamīn in the accusative; the author’s preferred parse is an accusative of detachment with an implied verb such as أمدح. ALUSI, d. 1270 (هارون بن موسى): Hārūn b. Mūsā reads al-ḥamda in the accusative, a construction common among Arabs for a definite verbal noun with an implied verb such as نحمد. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The implied verb for the accusative is in the first-person plural, matching naʿbudu and nastaʿīn and the humility of worship, rather than a majestic first-person singular. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (هارون بن موسى): Hārūn b. Mūsā reads al-ḥamda in the accusative, like Arabs who use definite verbal nouns with an omitted verb; the implied “we praise” suits worship and seeking help better than royal “we.” | mentions 1:5 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Some grammarians say verbal nouns are originally accusative because events require predication; the underlying verbal relation is normally expressed by a verb, making the noun-plus-verb construction seem redundant. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعضهم): One analysis treats the accusative as an adjective cut off from its antecedent, supplying an implied verb such as I praise or I mention; an objection about the following adjective is answered by taking Rahman as apposition. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayhi explains that praise expressions originally use an omitted verb in the absolute accusative, as in 'we praise God with praise'; the verbal noun replaces the verb. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Sibawayhi distinguishes supplicatory accusative sources from declarative ones such as hamdan and shukran, whose omitted verbs mean 'I praise' or 'I thank'. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The cited grammar says a definite source such as al-hamdu can be raised as a subject because it is declarative and definite; the sense of the omitted verb remains. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari also describes hamd's original accusative with an omitted verb and its shift to nominative as a means of indicating stability. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): A reading with al-hamda in the accusative and definite article is a Tamimi dialect form attested by Sibawayhi; its implied verb limits praise to the speaker or intended group. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains conventional verbal nouns such as “beware” or “thanks” as accusatives governed by verbs suppressed from use, and distinguishes supplicatory formulas from other expressions. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-hamdu is nominative in all transmitted readings; its predicate is lillah, while an underlying analysis treats hamd as an accusative verbal noun replacing an omitted verb meaning “we praise God.” SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The nominative reading al-hamdu makes a nominal sentence and is stronger and more enduring than the accusative, which requires an implied verb."}, {"id": "1:2/q04/p4", "position": "The expression reports praise while performing it.", "reasons": "ALUSI, d. 1270 (الدواني): Al-Dawwānī explains al-Sharīf’s requirement of inward and outward exaltation as intending the performative creation of esteem, not belief in a proposition. ALUSI, d. 1270 (ابن الهمام): Ibn al-Humām argues that ḥamd is performative because it manifests qualities rather than establishing them, so praise need not be informative. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī answers that hamd can be performative, so correspondence to belief is inapplicable; ordinary speakers also use iʿtiqād to mean regard or esteem for someone. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī opens a further question about whether “Praise belongs to God” is declarative or performative; most scholars call it declarative, following the apparent form. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (فريق ثان): A contrasting position calls the sentence a pure performative, shifted from reporting into praise like contracts and verbs of praise or blame. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur's preferred account is a report used to perform praise: the intention is performative, while report form supplies duration, universality, exclusivity, and emphasis unavailable to direct performative wording. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Dhu al-Rumma's phrase 'we brought into being thanks for its Creator' confirms that Arabs described praise or thanks as something they create, treating it as performative expression. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He says these effects cannot be achieved throug h a purely performative wording such as hamdan lillah or ahmadu Allah hamdan. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Most scholars treat al-hamd lillah as a report that praise is established for God; others call it performative praise, a transferred report, or a report that entails performance, and the author accepts both report and exaltation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (قسم): Another group treats the expression as performative because it embodies love. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (قسم): A further view classifies it as a report that also contains a performative act. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): الحمد لله can carry both report and invocation, but إن الحمد لله forces a performative reading and loses that breadth."}, {"id": "1:2/q04/p5", "position": "The definite article has a connected-speech hamza and special interrogative forms.", "reasons": "AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains added alif-lām, hamzat waṣl and lengthening with an interrogative; he cites 10:59, 27:59, 10:91, 37:153 and 34:8. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains added alif-lām, hamzat waṣl and lengthening with an interrogative; he cites 10:59, 27:59, 10:91, 37:153 and 34:8. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains added alif-lām, hamzat waṣl and lengthening with an interrogative; he cites 10:59, 27:59, 10:91, 37:153 and 34:8. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains added alif-lām, hamzat waṣl and lengthening with an interrogative; he cites 10:59, 27:59, 10:91, 37:153 and 34:8."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
