<<chunk 27, part 5 of 0..5>>
بويه): The lām normally has fatḥa because it cannot begin with sukun; lām of possession and emphasis are distinguished, and attached pronouns restore its original opening vowel. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-hamdu lillah is better than ash-shukru lillah because it praises God for every benefit to the worlds, even one not received by the speaker; shukr is personal gratitude. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-hamdu lillah also means praise and thanks are God’s due and property, because His abundant favors make Him inherently deserving of them. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): They further argue that if God is praised intrinsically, no act causes that entitlement, so no duty, compensation, or reward is owed; if it is not intrinsic, God would depend on another. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (طائفة من العلماء): One group prefers alhamdulillah because it combines praise with the monotheism expressed by “There is no god but God.” BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Readings assimilate dāl and lām in opposite directions, treating the letters as one word because they are used together. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Two recitations assimilate the dāl and lām in either direction, treating them as one word because the terms are used together. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī assimilate the dāl's kasra to the lām's kasra; the author calls this stranger because a case vowel follows a non-case vowel. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): The lām can express possession, transfer of ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, exclamation, specification, result, location, endpoint, and superiority; Qur'anic and Arabic examples illustrate these functions. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 7:57, 17:107 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The lām in lillāh has numerous possible relations, including ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, specification, outcome, time, endpoint, and elevation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Although al-ʿālamīn is an irregular plural, Abū Ḥayyān favors the responsible creatures because a cited verse and Ḥafṣ's lām-kasra reading support that scope. | mentions 29:44 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām in li-llah expresses entitlement here; other senses include ownership, transfer, kinship, cause, address, oath exclamation, clarification, result, location, endpoint, elevation, and augmentation. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 12:23, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 35:13, 17:109, 12:43, 11:107, 43:29, 16:1, 27:72, 8:9 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): Ibn Kathir says ʿālam derives from ʿalāmah, a sign, because every created thing points to its Maker, Creator, and oneness; he cites a poem by Ibn al-Mu'tazz. DURR, d. 911 (جعفر بن محمد): Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad tells how he vowed to praise God with approved praises if his mule returned, then said al-hamdulillah alone because it encompasses all praise. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Some prefer Ibrāhīm’s reading because following the first sound is easier than the reverse and because the dāl’s inflection is stronger than the lām’s fixed vowel. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): A particularly unusual parsing makes the lām causal, so that praise is established for God’s sake. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The thing praised for is the cause of the praise: its excellence becomes manifest through the praised person’s possession of it; most scholars include both acts and enduring qualities. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن الهمام): Another interpretation parses al-ḥamd as a passive verbal noun meaning being praised; its form permits other readings, and some even take the lām as causal. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن الهمام): Some interpreters propose forty-two possibilities for the phrase; a rare proposal makes its lām mean because of God. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The question how servants’ created praise is “for” God is answered by distinguishing attachment from inherence, like knowledge attaching to its objects; another parses the noun as passive “being praised,” while a rare view makes the lām causal. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God alone has real ownership, which necessarily entails governance because whatever depends on Him for existence also depends on Him in its effects. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah is better than inna al-hamd lillah because believers do not doubt the claim, and the unmarked formula can report praise while enacting exaltation; inna makes it mere report. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): الحمد لله also declares praise to be God's rightful property because of His abundant favors; a personal act of praising does not assert this entitlement."}, {"id": "1:2/q06/p3", "position": "The lām marks God's possession of praise.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The lām in lillāh can signify fitting اختصاص, ownership, or power and dominion; each makes all praise belong to God. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): God's lordship and mercy make Him worthy of praise; lordship as mastery or ownership is followed fittingly by mercy, which sustains servants' hope after failure. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says that if someone possessed the entire world and then said al-hamdulillah, the praise would be better than it all. ALUSI, d. 1270 (معظم العلماء): Most scholars consider الحمد لله informative: otherwise God’s possession of the praised qualities would begin only when the speaker utters the praise. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The lām in lillah denotes entitlement, particularity, and ownership; the whole genus and every form of hamd belongs to God. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The genus article with the possessive l am implies all praise belongs to God: if any instance belonged to another, exclusive possession of the genus would fail; this is hyperbolic restriction. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The lam in li-llah may mean figurative exclusive possession or strengthen the verbal noun's relation as a weak, derived construction; exclusivity is also conveyed by the two definite parts. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The claim that Arabs reserved رب for God is false: they used it for human rulers and masters, idols, and particular possessions; الربّة was a name for al-ʿUzza and أرباب is plural. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): رب may be a verbal noun or an adjective from upbringing, meaning one who nurtures and directs; tarbiya gradually brings something to its perfection. It may also derive from ownership, with an intensive or rare adjectival form. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Rabb means an owner who manages what is owned; human ownership is a conventional social relation, unlike real ownership grounded in dependence of existence. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): Rabb combines rightful possession and authority with rearing, sustaining, and fostering something from its beginning to completion. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The visible domain is called the realm of dominion and witness, while immaterial existence is the unseen and angelic realm; God alone owns the latter, though worldly ownership can appear to belong to others. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Used alone, Rabb refers only to God and names His ownership and nurturing; in a construct such as master of a house, it can refer to others. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah implies that God is living, possesses perfect qualities, and does beautiful deeds and favors; madḥ lillah would not convey all this. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God is praiseworthy in His essence, lordship, rightly placed mercy, and ownership of Judgment Day; the sequence spans all times from eternity through the endless afterlife. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Lord of all worlds establishes God’s oneness and ownership of all creation, with no other lord or deity. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The sequence praises God for His essence, lordship, properly placed mercy, and ownership and kingship on the day of recompense."}, {"id": "1:2/q06/p4", "position": "The lām is explanatory.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): In the accusative reading the lām is explanatory, not a strengthening of transitivity, since the verbal noun cannot govern this phrase as its object. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): With the accusative, lillāh is an explanatory lām; it cannot be governed by the verbal noun, as the Arabic construction saqyan li-Zayd shows. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): On the accusative reading, li-llah is attached to an omitted explanatory verb such as I mean; source nouns do not normally govern this lām phrase, though it may strengthen a derivative verb. | mentions 47:8 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām may be explanatory, resultative, locative meaning in, at, or after, terminative, or superposition; the source gives examples for each. | mentions 12:23, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 35:13, 17:109"}]}

<<end of chunk>>
