<<chunk 27, part 4 of 0..5>>
ng “al-hamd lillah rabb al-alamin” counts as thanking God, after which He increases the speaker. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (كعب): Kab says “al-hamd lillah” is praise of God. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is “la ilaha illa Allah” and the best supplication is “al-hamd lillah.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says nothing is more beloved to God than praise, so God praised Himself with “al-hamd lillah.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (علي بن أبي طالب): A report attributed to Ali says that saying “al-hamd lillah rabb al-alamin” at each heard sneeze prevents toothache and earache. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): After an expedition returned safely, the Prophet fulfilled his pledge to thank God by saying “al-hamd lillah.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (جعفر بن محمد): When Jaafar ibn Muhammad's mule returned, he thanked God with only “al-hamd lillah,” saying this gathered all praise. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Some restrict the worlds to rational beings among angels, humans, and jinn; al-Suyūṭī associates this reading with ʿilm, while universal scope fits ʿalāma, sign. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الأكثر): Most scholars explain God’s self-praise as declaring His entitlement to praise, commanding praise, quoting the words of servants, or figuratively displaying His perfections; al-Sayyid favors the last account. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الحسن البصري وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī and Zayd b. ʿAlī read with the dāl assimilated toward the following lām; Ibrāhīm b. Abla and Bedouins assimilate the reverse way. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Naming God by His essential name avoids suggesting that He deserves praise only through one particular attribute; entitlement by essence still means entitlement for divine excellence. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الأكثر): Most authorities interpret God praising Himself as reporting His entitlement to praise, commanding praise, speaking through servants, or figuratively displaying His perfect attributes; al-Sayyid favors the last explanation. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (النواس بن سمعان): Al-Ṭabarānī reports that after the Prophet’s she-camel was stolen, he vowed to thank God if it returned; when it did, he said alhamdulillah, and the Companions awaited fasting or prayer, showing they understood gratitude as action. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The standard transmitted reading has al-ḥamdu nominative as the subject; Ḥasan al-Baṣrī and Zayd b. ʿAlī assimilate the vowel of dāl to the following lām, while Ibrāhīm b. Abla and Bedouins do the reverse. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Naming God by His essence avoids suggesting that entitlement to praise belongs only to one attribute; essential entitlement means no particular attribute is specified, not that praise lacks a beautiful ground. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الملا خسرو): Entitlement by essence means entitlement without specifying a particular attribute; it does not mean God deserves praise apart from beautiful qualities. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Mentioning the divine proper name avoids implying that entitlement to praise belongs only to one attribute; the entitlement belongs to the essence without isolating it from its attributes. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Fatiha’s successive clauses unfold the opening praise and return to alhamdu lillah; the surah is the root and comprehensive representative of the other Qur’anic surahs. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The basmala is the crown, the Qur’an a perfect body, Fatiha its head, and alhamdu lillah its face; mercy, guidance, worship, and divine unity express its spiritual life. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Alhamdu lillah informs believers, implies reverent praise, and uses a timeless nominal sentence; the four following clauses explain it, making Fatiha one sentence in substance. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Al-hamdu is nominative as the subject in every transmitted reading, and li-llah is its predicate, related to the general existential predicate. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Rabb is an attribute of Allah: after praise is attached to His essence to show inherent entitlement, the attribute adds entitlement through His qualities; this is clearer than saying 'praise belongs to Lord of the worlds.' | mentions 83:6 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-hamdu lillah implies all attributes of perfection that entitle God to exclusive praise. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report in Sahih al-Bukhari from Abu Sa'id ibn al-Mu'alla says the Prophet identified al-Hamdu lillah as the seven oft-repeated verses and the great Qur'an given to him. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو هريرة): The first proof is Malik's report from Abu Hurayra: God's division of prayer begins with al-Hamdu lillah, without mentioning the basmala; prayer here means recitation in prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبي بن كعب): In the second proof, Ubayy ibn Ka'b recites the celebrated sura from al-Hamdu lillah to its end when asked how he opens prayer, without reciting the basmala. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports in Muslim and other collections that the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar began recitation with al-Hamdu lillah and did not mention the basmala at either end. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (عائشة): Aisha reports that the Prophet opened prayer with the takbir and began recitation with al-Hamdu lillah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (عبد الله بن مغفل): Ibn Mughaffal says he prayed with the Prophet and the first three caliphs but never heard them say the basmala, and directs worshippers to recite al-Hamdu lillah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (البيضاوي): Al-Baydawi explains pairing God's proper name with al-Rahman and al-Rahim as invoking His entitlement to assistance and mercy: al-Rahman signals the gifts involved in righteous action, with al-Rahim explained later. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayh says some such source expressions can be made nominative topics, as in al-hamdu lillah; the definite form favors this declarative use. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur cites Sibawayh to explain the Arabic stages of this verbal noun construction and the rationale for the nominative al-hamdu lillah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-hamdu is nominative in all transmitted readings; its predicate is lillah, while an underlying analysis treats hamd as an accusative verbal noun replacing an omitted verb meaning “we praise God.” IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Hamd can be fronted deliberately even though it is the grammatical subject, since Arabic eloquent usage offers both al-hamdu lillah and lillah al-hamd. | mentions 45:36 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Although the generic article is not itself exhaustive, its combination with the lām of divine specification implies that every instance of praise belongs to God; the restriction is rhetorical and emphatic. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The lām in lillah can indicate rhetorical specification or strengthen the relation of the verbal-noun subject to its predicate; specification remains conveyed by the definiteness of both parts. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): To decide whether al-hamdu lillah is report or performance, Ibn Ashur first explains that Arabic can turn statements into speech acts, as with sale formulas and words of praise or hope. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur's conclusion is that al-hamdu lillah reports praise while functioning as its performance; declarative form adds permanence, comprehensiveness, exclusivity, and emphasis. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He says these effects cannot be achieved throug h a purely performative wording such as hamdan lillah or ahmadu Allah hamdan. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf says all Arabs pronounce the divine lām emphatically, and their agreement shows the practice was inherited. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): Rabb al-ʿālamīn corresponds to Jewish liturgical ribbon ʿōlām, an eschatological title spanning this world and the next; a Syriac parallel itself lacks that connotation. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): The form may be a cross-language wordplay presenting the emerging community as citizens of both worlds, through a nisba formation from ʿālam and rabbinic Hebrew ʿōlām. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The impersonal formula al-hamd lillah does not bind praise to a particular speaker, unlike I or we praise God, and presents God as universally praised. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Saying I praise God reports the speaker's act but does not establish that its object deserves praise; al-hamd lillah states God's entitlement without a specific speaker. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The verb form is time-bound to the speaker's present or future, while al-hamd lillah leaves praise ongoing without a temporal limit. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah declares praise to be God's due by His very essence and abundant favors, unlike a report that one person praises Him. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamdu lillah is a nominal and definite expression, unlike hamdan lillah; al can indicate known praise or all praise, while indefiniteness lacks this scope. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Most scholars treat al-hamd lillah as a report that praise is established for God; others call it performative praise, a transferred report, or a report that entails performance, and the author accepts both report and exaltation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-hamd lillah is better than lillah al-hamd here: fronting lillah suggests exclusivity or rebuttal of doubt, neither of which fits this address to believers. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Using God's proper name rather than an attribute avoids implying that He deserves praise only for one quality; the name points to His essence and entitlement across all attributes. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The verse's wording is preferable to the alternatives madḥ, shukr, I/we praise, an imperative, accusative praise, an indefinite praise, inna, fronted lillah, or a divine attribute."}, {"id": "1:2/q06/p2", "position": "The lām means for God's sake.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (سي
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
