<<chunk 27, part 3 of 0..5>>
 praise will be spared abdominal illness. DURR, d. 911 (موسى بن طلحة): Musa ibn Talha reports God's instruction to Solomon to remember Him if anyone sneezes, even beyond seven seas. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): When someone sneezes and says al-hamd, an angel responds “Lord of the worlds”; when the sneezer repeats it, the angel says “may God have mercy on you.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (علي بن أبي طالب): A report attributed to Ali says that saying “al-hamd lillah rabb al-alamin” at each heard sneeze prevents toothache and earache. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (واثلة بن الأسقع): Wathila reports that praising God when greeting a sneezer prevents abdominal illness; another report says God told Solomon to remember Him when someone sneezes e ven seven seas away."}, {"id": "1:2/q05/p8", "position": "Praise and the declaration of oneness have distinct reported merits.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (طائفة): Another group considers la ilaha illa Allah better because it repels unbelief and associating partners, and people fight on its basis; they cite the Prophet’s command to fight until people say it. QURTUBI, d. 671 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya chooses la ilaha illa Allah as superior, citing the report that it is the best thing the Prophet and earlier prophets said. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is lā ilāha illā Allāh and the best supplication is al-ḥamdu lillāh; al-Tirmidhi grades this report ḥasan gharīb. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (طائفة): A group holds that al-ḥamdu lillāhi rabbi l-ʿālamīn is better than lā ilāha illā Allāh because it combines praise with monotheism. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (آخرون): Others hold that lā ilāha illā Allāh is superior because it distinguishes faith from unbelief and is the formula people must profess; reports also call it the best remembrance. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says the best remembrance is there is no god but God, while the best supplication is al-hamdulillah; al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is “la ilaha illa Allah” and the best supplication is “al-hamd lillah.”"}]}
{"id": "1:2/q06", "question": "What does the lām in lillāh express?", "turns_on": "Whether the lām marks God's right, possession, explanation, or cause.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q06/p1", "position": "The lām marks God's entitlement to praise.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الأخفش وأبو علي الفارسي): They parse al-ḥamdu as a nominative subject with an omitted predication such as is due or is established for God; the phrase lillah supplies its meaning. TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni says kasra on ḥamd and ḍamma on lillah signal a close subject-predicate bond, making the two parts sound like one word. TABRISI, d. 548 (سيبويه): The kasra of lām in the jussive verb li-yafʿal distinguishes it from emphatic lām. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): Some derive ʿālam from ʿalāma, a sign pointing to its Creator; that derivation supports taking it for all created existence. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الجمهور): Most readers pronounce the lām of lillāh with kasra; Ibn ʿAbla uses ḍamma, a dialect of some Rabīʿa according to al-Farrāʾ. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (ابن السميفع): Ibn al-Sumayfa reads al-ḥamda with fatḥa on dāl and kasra on lām. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو نهيك): Abū Nuhayk reads both dāl and lām in al-ḥamd lillāh with kasra. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أهل النظر): The derivation of ʿālam from ʿalāma, “sign,” supports the speculative theologians' view: the world is named as a sign pointing to its Creator. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Considering divine wisdom in the throne, heavens, luminaries, elements, minerals, plants, and animals adds vast further questions; most of creation is made for human benefit, and al-hamd lillah thus encompasses roughly a million issues. | mentions 45:13 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Saying al-hamdu lillah rather than al-madhu lillah acknowledges God as a freely choosing agent, not a necessary emanation as philosophers claim. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The formula says al-hamdu lillah rather than ahmadu Allah so it declares God worthy of praise before any creature praises Him, from eternity to eternity. QURTUBI, d. 671 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abī ʿAbla reads the dāl and lām with ḍamma by vowel assimilation for phonetic harmony, a common pattern illustrated by other words and a poetic line. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abi ʿAbla reads the dāl and lām with ḍamma for vowel harmony, a common Arabic tendency also illustrated by other readings and poetic examples. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): A poem’s “wayl ummiha” derives from “waylun li-ummiha”: the first lām was dropped and the hamza’s ḍamma shifted after kasra proved heavy. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Anas says that if someone owned the whole world and then said alhamdulillah, the praise would be better than it. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The entitlement to praise implies that God is living, powerful, willing, and knowing. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): The lām in lillah attaches to an omitted predicate, understood as ‘due’ or ‘established.’ ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (الجمهور): The majority read al-ḥamdu with ḍamma on the dāl. Ibrāhīm ibn Abī ʿAbla assimilates its mīm to the following lām; al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī assimilate the dāl's kasra to the lām's, a stranger assimilation. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): With nominative al-ḥamdu the lām marks entitlement; with accusative al-ḥamda a verb such as “I praise God” must be supplied, conveying renewed action. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers that al-ʿālamīn denote morally responsible beings, supported by the verse about signs for the knowledgeable; Ḥafṣ's kasra on the lām clarifies the sense. | mentions 30:22 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (إبراهيم بن أبي عبلة): Ibrāhīm ibn Abī ʿAbla harmonizes the mīm's vowel with the following lām's ḍamma. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الحسن وزيد بن علي): Al-Ḥasan and Zayd ibn ʿAlī harmonize the dāl's kasra with the lām's kasra, a stranger kind of agreement between inflectional and non-inflectional vowels. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The lām in “to God” restricts all praise to Him, and the annexation “Master of the Day of Judgment” underscores His sole dominion when other dominions vanish. | mentions 40:16 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Raising al-hamd is stronger and more expressive of stable praise, while accusative signals renewal; Abraham's salām is better than the angels' salāman by the verse's instruction to answer more beautifully. | mentions 11:69, 4:86 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The kasra in a variant al-hamdi may be vowel harmony with the following lām, a Tamim and some Ghatafan dialect feature; another possibility is hidden nominative or accusative inflection. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): A variant with damma on the lām of li-llah follows the preceding dāl; al-Zamakhshari prefers harmony from inflection to building, citing a Qays dialect and Qur'anic murdifin. | mentions 8:9 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām is regularly extra with a preposed complement of a verb or with a derivative governor, and elsewhere only irregularly. | mentions 12:43, 11:107 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): For raddafa lakum, some explain the lām by semantic inclusion and others regard it as extra. | mentions 27:72 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (ابن أبي عبلة): Ibn Abi Abla reads both dāl and lām with ḍamma by assimilating the second vowel to the first; Ibn Kathir calls the reading anomalous. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir explains praise as exclusive thanks to God for countless blessings, including faculties for worship, worldly provision, and guidance toward lasting bliss despite no prior entitlement. NASHR, d. 833 (إبراهيم بن أبي عبلة): Ibrahim b. Abi Ablah reads the first lām in al-ḥamdulillāh with ḍamma. NASHR, d. 833 (الحسن): Al-Hasan also reads the lām in Allāh with fatḥa, matching the preceding accusative; the source calls this a dialect of some Qays speakers. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Al-hamd lillah establishes that God deserves praise for His essence and perfection; Rabb al-alamin adds His lordship, sovereignty and beneficence, while the worlds point to creation's beginning and the inference to resurrection. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says the best remembrance is there is no god but God, while the best supplication is al-hamdulillah; al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says nothing is more beloved to God than praise, so God praised Himself by saying al-hamdulillah. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): In a weakly chained report, the Prophet treats saying al-hamdulillah after his stolen camel returned as fulfilling his vow to thank God. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): A report from Anas says tawhid is the price of Paradise and al-hamdulillah the price of every blessing; people share Paradise according to their deeds. DURR, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas describes an exchange at sneezing: the sneezer says al-hamdulillah, an angel answers Lord of the worlds, and after the sneezer repeats it the angel asks God to show mercy. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): Ali reports that the Prophet vowed to thank God properly if his family expedition returned safely; on their return he said al-hamdulillah for God's abundant favors and counted that as fulfilling the vow. DURR, d. 911 (منصور بن إبراهيم): Mansur ibn Ibrahim transmits the saying that al-hamdulillah is the expression whose reward is multiplied most. DURR, d. 911 (سفيان الثوري): Sufyan al-Thawri says al-hamdulillah is both remembrance and gratitude, a combination found in no other expression. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الله تعالى): When the servant says “al-hamd lillah,” God says the servant has thanked and praised Him. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): When a returned camel prompted the Prophet to fulfill a vow of gratitude, he said “al-hamd lillah,” which the Companions accepted as thanks. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الحكم بن عمير): In a weak report, sayi
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
