<<chunk 28, part 1 of 0..1>>
“al-hamd lillah.” DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Umar reports that al-hamd fills the balance and there is no barrier between “la ilaha illa Allah” and God. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The name derives from al-ilah, definite form of ilah, a generic word for deity; ilah is linked to worship or states entailing humble reverence and follows a passive fa'al pattern like kitab. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur thinks the name was established before Arab idolatry and originally signified the unique deity; it became a proper name through exclusive reference, not common usage. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Arabs do not appear to have used definite singular al-ilah for an idol: they used a possessive construction, another title, or the plural alihah. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Frequent use led speakers to drop the hamza from al-ilah, as in al-nas from al-unas; Ba'ith ibn Hurayth preserves al-ilah and Ubayd ibn al-Abras preserves al-unas with hamza. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari uses al-Ba'ith's 'ma'adh al-ilah' as evidence that Allah originated from al-ilah; Ibn Ashur says this is persuasive because ma'adh conventionally takes Allah as its complement. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He conjectures that the name was established before Arab idolatry as the unique true deity, becoming a proper name by exclusive reference rather than predominance; it then marked the Creator as uniquely deserving worship. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur finds no evidence that Arabs used the definite singular al-ilah for an idol; they used a possessive phrase, often rabb, or a plural, and a conquest report speaks of idols in the Kaaba. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He says frequent use led Arabs to drop the hamza in al-ilah when referring to God, as in al-nas from al-unas, though they retained it in some speech. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-Kashshaf's derivation of Allah from al-ilah is well supported: the poet's fixed expression معاذ الإلاه shows speakers treated al-ilah as the name's source, with variation only in the form's letters. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Allah suits the following worship verse: on the prevalent etymology it derives from ilah, the worshipped, and the Qur'an often pairs this name with worship. | mentions 39:66, 13:36, 39:64 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The name Allah suits the move to worship because it denotes the deity to be worshipped, and the author says it is paired with worship more than fifty times in the Quran."}, {"id": "1:2/q07/p3", "position": "Allāh is adapted from a Syriac divine name.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A further etymology borrows Syriac laaha as a divine name, Arabized by removing its final alif and adding the article. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): A further proposal takes the divine name from Syriac لاها, adapted by dropping its final alif and adding Arabic ال. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): Rabb al-ʿālamīn corresponds to Jewish liturgical ribbon ʿōlām, an eschatological title spanning this world and the next; a Syriac parallel itself lacks that connotation. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): Syriac ʿâlam ʿâlmīn could nonetheless evoke the Greek liturgical formula eis tous aiōnas tōn aiōnōn, meaning eternally."}, {"id": "1:2/q07/p4", "position": "Allāh derives from a root of hiddenness.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (الجوهري عن سيبويه): Another proposed derivation takes Allah from laah, a verbal noun meaning to be hidden; the article was added to suggest the original sense, as in fadl and majd used as names."}, {"id": "1:2/q07/p5", "position": "Allāh derives from a root of bewilderment.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur derives Allah from al-ilah, a common noun for deity; its root may mean worship or states such as bewilderment, stillness, fear, or ardor, all associated with submission and reverence."}, {"id": "1:2/q07/p6", "position": "Allāh was coined directly as God's name.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj, with the view also attributed to al-Khalil and Sibawayh, holds that Allah was coined directly as God's name rather than derived from أله."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
