<<chunk 28, part 0 of 0..1>>
{"id": "1:2/q07", "question": "What does the name Allāh mean and why use it here?", "turns_on": "Whether the divine name is derived from al-ilāh, another root, Syriac, or coined directly.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q07/p1", "position": "Allāh is God's proper name and names His essence.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas likewise uses Rabb for being ruled when discussing ʿAbd Allah ibn al-Zubayr and ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwan. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The formula says al-hamdu lillah rather than ahmadu Allah so it declares God worthy of praise before any creature praises Him, from eternity to eternity. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The declarative al-ḥamdu lillāh is preferable to ahmadu Allāh: it establishes praise as God’s right instead of reporting one speaker’s act. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The sequence assigns praise to God, then names Him Lord of the worlds: Allah signifies necessary perfection, while Lord of the worlds shows that all else flows from His generosity, making Him beyond completeness. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Allah is nobler than Lord, although supplicants commonly call God ‘Lord’; al-Rāzī refers readers to his earlier discussion of the divine names. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Rabb means owner; al-Ṣiḥāḥ says it is a divine name used of others only in an annexed construction, though pre-Islamic Arabs also used it for a king. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Abu ʿAbd Allah explains that the person first receives the world and then the enduring word of praise, which is better because the world perishes while the word remains among the righteous deeds. | mentions 18:46 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rabb means owner; lexically it is a divine name, used of others only in a possessive construction, though pre-Islamic Arabs also used it for a king. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو عبد الله): Abu ʿAbd Allah explains that the enduring word is better because the world perishes, while praise remains among the righteous deeds; both world and praise ultimately come from God. | mentions 18:46 NASAFI, d. 710 (author): For Nasafi, the definite article in al-hamd is comprehensive, against the Mu‘tazila; its attachment to Allah, the name of the divine essence, gathers all perfections and reflects the doctrine of created acts. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The definite article in al-hamd is exhaustive according to the author's school, against the Mu'tazila; joining it to Allah's proper name gathers every perfection and rests on the doctrine of created acts. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The common reading makes rabb genitive as an adjective or appositive to Allah; accusative allows an implied I praise, a detached praise, or vocative, with vocative weakest because it separates adjective from noun; nominative is detached predicate huwa rabb. NASHR, d. 833 (الحسن): Al-Hasan also reads the lām in Allāh with fatḥa, matching the preceding accusative; the source calls this a dialect of some Qays speakers. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the Fatiha is the Qur'an's mother: its first three verses encompass the divine names and attributes, while its last three cover the creature's way to God, mercy or failure. | mentions 2:281, 75:17, 33:50, 33:52 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عمرو بن العاص): Abd Allah ibn Amr assigns distinct meanings to the formulas: tasbih is the creatures' prayer, al-hamd is gratitude, tahlil is sincerity, takbir fills heaven and earth, and “no power” expresses surrender. ITQAN, d. 911 (ابن أبي جمرة): Explaining the scale of commentary, Ibn Abi Jamra says the opening requires explaining praise, the divine name and transcendence, and the worlds, their nature, types, number, and extent. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The Sufi hierarchy distinguishes Rabb, Rahmān, and Allāh: Rahmān encompasses more divine attributes, while Allāh names the highest, all-encompassing station of divinity. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الشيخ الأكبر): In Ibn ʿArabī’s account the spirit names God its Rabb; God gives it divine names and attributes to know through existence, while veiling the manner of that gift because the creature cannot bear it. | mentions 50:16 ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Praise precedes the divine name because the speaker is about to perform the act of praise; in 30:18 the order is reversed for a different purpose. | mentions 30:18 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Mentioning the divine proper name avoids implying that entitlement to praise belongs only to one attribute; the entitlement belongs to the essence without isolating it from its attributes. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Allah signifies the all-encompassing divine essence and highest level; below it are oneness, mercifulness, lordship, and sovereignty, while absolute divine uniqueness has no manifestation of created qualities. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ساداتنا الصوفية): Sufi masters say the appropriate divine name in prayer changes with the seeker's spiritual state and whether the experience is one of differentiation or union. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): A Sufi anthropology maps the five divine names to the human's angelic intellect, devilish, predatory, animal, and dense bodily dimensions, with cited verses illustrating the correspondences. | mentions 13:28, 23:97, 25:26, 5:4, 55:31 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The final rank manifests the divine names Hamid, Mahmud, and Hamid together; the Prophet also bears the related names Ahmed and Muhammad. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Allah is the proper name of the necessarily existent essence, worthy of every praise. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Proper-name formation can alter a word: Ibn Jinni's example Shums ibn Malik changes the usual vowel, and Zamakhshari cites fixed-case Abdullah; Allah's naming has no parallel among personal names. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Calling Allah with ya while retaining the definite article shows that speakers treat the article as part of the name, unlike ordinary nouns entered by al. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari says Arabs pronounce Allah's lam emphatically except where the preceding sound requires kasra, treating inherited consensus as evidence against speculative explanations. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (جمع من العلماء): A group of scholars, cited by al-Tilimsani, says discussion of Allah's name should be avoided out of reverence and because it requires scriptural permission. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Rabb is an attribute of Allah: after praise is attached to His essence to show inherent entitlement, the attribute adds entitlement through His qualities; this is clearer than saying 'praise belongs to Lord of the worlds.' | mentions 83:6 IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The four descriptions—Lord of the worlds, Merciful, Compassionate, King of Judgment Day—show each divine name's meaning merits praise and distinguishes God from alleged deities. | mentions 1:3, 1:4 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (البيضاوي): Al-Baydawi explains pairing God's proper name with al-Rahman and al-Rahim as invoking His entitlement to assistance and mercy: al-Rahman signals the gifts involved in righteous action, with al-Rahim explained later. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أمية ابن أبي الصلت): Umayya ibn Abi al-Salt's praise of Abd Allah ibn Jud'an says the addressee's modesty and praise can make a request unnecessary. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He says these effects cannot be achieved throug h a purely performative wording such as hamdan lillah or ahmadu Allah hamdan. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Allah is the proper name of the necessarily existent divine essence, the one deserving every praise. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The divine name became a unique proper form whose article is treated as part of the word, as the vocative يا الله shows; its formation has no parallel among ordinary names. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): A poet's use of لاه and fixed expressions such as لله أبوك support treating لاه as a shortened form of Allah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (التلمساني): Al-Tilimsani reports a group of scholars who refrain from explaining the divine name out of reverence and because discussion requires scriptural permission; Ibn Ashur calls this an astonishing opinion. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Using God's proper name rather than an attribute avoids implying that He deserves praise only for one quality; the name points to His essence and entitlement across all attributes. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (روح المعاني): The proper name makes God's essence, rather than one particular quality, the ground of His right to praise. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Even attributes such as Living or Knowing can describe others, and even unique descriptions may not explicitly identify God, so Allah is the clearest name. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Using God's proper name means He deserves praise for His essence, not merely for one attribute such as power or creation."}, {"id": "1:2/q07/p2", "position": "Allāh derives from al-ilāh, the deity.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (طائفة): Another group considers la ilaha illa Allah better because it repels unbelief and associating partners, and people fight on its basis; they cite the Prophet’s command to fight until people say it. QURTUBI, d. 671 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya chooses la ilaha illa Allah as superior, citing the report that it is the best thing the Prophet and earlier prophets said. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is lā ilāha illā Allāh and the best supplication is al-ḥamdu lillāh; al-Tirmidhi grades this report ḥasan gharīb. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (طائفة): A group holds that al-ḥamdu lillāhi rabbi l-ʿālamīn is better than lā ilāha illā Allāh because it combines praise with monotheism. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (آخرون): Others hold that lā ilāha illā Allāh is superior because it distinguishes faith from unbelief and is the formula people must profess; reports also call it the best remembrance. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the best remembrance is “la ilaha illa Allah” and the best supplication is 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
