<<chunk 29, part 4 of 0..6>>
ed one, or reformer; some also understand companion or creator. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): God's lordship and mercy make Him worthy of praise; lordship as mastery or ownership is followed fittingly by mercy, which sustains servants' hope after failure. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām in li-llah expresses entitlement here; other senses include ownership, transfer, kinship, cause, address, oath exclamation, clarification, result, location, endpoint, elevation, and augmentation. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 12:23, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 35:13, 17:109, 12:43, 11:107, 43:29, 16:1, 27:72, 8:9 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Rabb can mean lord, owner, enduring, worshipped, or reformer; some add companion, supported by two poems, but here the author prefers owner and says no extra sense is needed; creator is another proposal. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): Rabb means owner and disposer, and in Arabic also master or one who manages something toward its good; each meaning applies to God. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): The unqualified title al-Rabb is used only for God; for other possessors it must be annexed, and some say al-Rabb is the greatest name. BIQAI, d. 885 (author): Al-ḥamd lillāh establishes that God deserves every praise by His essence and all perfections; Rabb adds that He deserves praise as Lord, Owner, and Benefactor. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (السيوطي): Al-Suyūṭī takes the prohibition on calling another “lord” as religious rather than linguistic; an old poem and al-Jawharī support him, while al-Shihāb allows non-owner senses with contextual indication. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The lām in lillah denotes entitlement, particularity, and ownership; the whole genus and every form of hamd belongs to God. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhshari limits rabb to 'master and owner,' its frequent Arabic sense, while allowing verbal-noun or adjective analysis; Ibn Ashur says context can select a less frequent established sense. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur finds no evidence that Arabs used the definite singular al-ilah for an idol; they used a possessive phrase, often rabb, or a plural, and a conquest report speaks of idols in the Kaaba. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The claim that Arabs reserved رب for God is false: they used it for human rulers and masters, idols, and particular possessions; الربّة was a name for al-ʿUzza and أرباب is plural. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The hadith discouraging a person from calling a human master ربي is an etiquette rule to prevent suspected association; possessive phrases such as رب الدار remain permissible. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Rabb means an owner who manages what is owned; human ownership is a conventional social relation, unlike real ownership grounded in dependence of existence. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God alone has real ownership, which necessarily entails governance because whatever depends on Him for existence also depends on Him in its effects. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The visible domain is called the realm of dominion and witness, while immaterial existence is the unseen and angelic realm; God alone owns the latter, though worldly ownership can appear to belong to others. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Rabb can mean owner, master, educator, guardian, and benefactor; the Lord of the worlds embodies these roles. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): An owner, master, and beneficent educator has a stronger claim to praise, and the Lord can direct His subjects as He wills. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Other opening praises name God as creator, originator, owner of all things, or sender of scripture; each fits its surah and the openings complement one another. | mentions 6:1, 35:1, 34:1, 18:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): These openings jointly describe God as originator, shaper, owner, sustainer, and guide through revealed books; Rabb al-alamin encompasses all these qualities and worlds. | mentions 6:1, 18:1, 34:1, 35:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God is praiseworthy in His essence, lordship, rightly placed mercy, and ownership of Judgment Day; the sequence spans all times from eternity through the endless afterlife. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Lord of all worlds establishes God’s oneness and ownership of all creation, with no other lord or deity. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Rabb al-alamin is the apt continuation after praise: Rabb means owner, master, educator, benefactor, and caretaker, and encompasses God's attributes. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The sequence praises God for His essence, lordship, properly placed mercy, and ownership and kingship on the day of recompense. STUDYQURAN (author): Rabb denotes master, arranger, and possessor; of God it means peerless Master who orders affairs and owns creation. KASHSHAF: Rabb is owner, an intensive epithet, unqualified only for God; Qurʾanic examples and Zayd's accusative are recorded. KASHSHAF: Rabb is owner, an intensive epithet, unqualified only for God; Qurʾanic examples and Zayd's accusative are recorded. KASHSHAF: Rabb is owner, an intensive epithet, unqualified only for God; Qurʾanic examples and Zayd's accusative are recorded. KASHSHAF: Rabb is owner, an intensive epithet, unqualified only for God; Qurʾanic examples and Zayd's accusative are recorded. KASHSHAF: Rabb is owner, an intensive epithet, unqualified only for God; Qurʾanic examples and Zayd's accusative are recorded. KASHSHAF-FULL: The text also treats rabb as intensive and reserves unqualified use for God."}, {"id": "1:2/q08/p3", "position": "Rabb nurtures creatures toward completion.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): All beautiful praise belongs to God, who deserves worship as the source of original blessings and the creator, nurturer, and reformer of creation; the verse teaches gratitude and praise. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Rabb also means caretaker, cultivator, or reformer; it can be restricted in other compounds, though used absolutely it is reserved for God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (قيل): A second etymology derives rabb from nurturing or cultivation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Knowledge of God’s existence is theoretical, not immediate; the world of heavens, earth, seas, minerals, plants, and animals needs a governing, originating, nurturing, and sustaining cause. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Kahf’s praise for the revealed Book concerns spiritual nurture through knowledge and unveiling, one kind of the Fātiḥa’s universal nurturing. | mentions 18:1 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Rāzī argues that gratitude is due at all times, even before revelation: the verse makes praise God’s right without qualification and grounds it in His nurturing and mercy. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Created nurturers seek their own profit, such as reward or praise, while God nurtures for the creatures’ benefit rather than His own. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): God’s nurturing does not diminish His store; unlike other givers, He gives from inexhaustible provision. | mentions 15:21 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): God gives before being asked, nurturing a person as a fetus and protecting him before he can think or pray. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): One derivation traces Rabb to tarbiya, since God manages and nurtures creation; the stepdaughter is called rabība because her mother’s husband raises her. In this sense it is an attribute of action, while owner or master denotes an attribute of essence. | mentions 4:23 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rabb may derive from nurture: God manages and raises creation; stepdaughters are called rabāʾib because a husband raises them, making Rabb an attribute of action, while owner or master is an attribute of essence. | mentions 4:23 BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Rabb originally means tarbiya, bringing something to perfection little by little, then became an intensive description like ṣawm and ʿadl. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Another derivation makes rabb a descriptive form from rabba-yarubbuhu; it then means owner because an owner preserves and nurtures what is owned. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Rabb originally means gradual nurturing toward completion, then became an intensive description; another derivation treats it as a noun for the owner who preserves and develops what he owns. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The five divine attributes unfold a sequence: God creates, nurtures with favors, conceals sin in mercy, forgives repentance, and finally judges. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Every possible being remains under God’s nurture: without the continuing influx of divine support and the removal of every impediment, it would return to nonexistence. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Because contingent beings need a cause both to begin and to persist, continual divine preservation is itself tarbiya; keeping even indefinitely many possible obstacles absent sustains a thing. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعض العارفين): A mystic observes that God has other servants, but each person has no lord but Him, while God nurtures each as though He had no servant but that person. ALUSI, d. 1270 (أرباب الظاهر): The outward scholars explain why petitioners say yā Rabb: a petitioner seeks what benefits and nurtures him, so calling on the nurturer is especially apt. | mentions 17:110, 7:180 ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Rabb originally denotes tarbiya: gradually bringing a thing to the fullness suited to its primordial capacity, from the growth of a young child. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Rabb is also used for creator, master, king, benefactor, reformer, worshipped one, and companion; tarbiya is the primary sense, with the others best treated as figurative extensions. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī interprets rabb here as owner; al-Ālūsī prefers tarbiya because owner would repeat the sense of Mālik yawm al-dīn and gives no clear reason for placing al-Raḥmān al-Raḥīm between them. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Rabb originally denotes nurturing: bringing a thing gradually to the perfection suited to its primordial capacity; the word’s derivation and grammatical form are d
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
