<<chunk 29, part 6 of 0..6>>
 like “might belongs to God”: God is both praiser and praised, and all things are His affairs, as the verse says creation and command belong to Him. | mentions 7:54 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو هريرة): Al-Bukhārī and Muslim report from Abū Hurayra that one should not say “feed your lord” or “give your lord ablution”; instead one should say “my master” or “my patron.” ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Allah signifies the all-encompassing divine essence and highest level; below it are oneness, mercifulness, lordship, and sovereignty, while absolute divine uniqueness has no manifestation of created qualities. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ساداتنا الصوفية): Sufi masters say the appropriate divine name in prayer changes with the seeker's spiritual state and whether the experience is one of differentiation or union. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): After invoking the Merciful God, the worshipper turns to praise Him and name His unrestricted lordship over all worlds. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Making God Lord of all worlds points away from a chaotic crowd of competing lords toward one sovereign, bringing order, certainty, and confidence in His constant care. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The four descriptions—Lord of the worlds, Merciful, Compassionate, King of Judgment Day—show each divine name's meaning merits praise and distinguishes God from alleged deities. | mentions 1:3, 1:4 IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A hadith discourages calling a human master 'my rabb' as etiquette to prevent implication of worship; 'master' is preferred, compounds for a house or animal are allowed, and unrestricted use for a king is more disliked. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf limits رب here to master or king, allowing either a verbal noun or adjective, because the word most commonly carries those meanings. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Quranic expressions about Joseph's master and the rival lords show that رب can refer to someone besides God; the term remained available in Arabic usage. | mentions 12:23, 12:39 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (التفسير القيم): The names following praise show God is praiseworthy in divinity, lordship, mercy, and kingship. STUDYQURAN (author): Some say the worlds are all existent things other than God; al-Rāzī adds that God can actualize infinitely many unknown universes, making Him Lord of all existence and space. | mentions 17:44"}, {"id": "1:2/q08/p5", "position": "Rabb manages and sets affairs right.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash says rabb al-ʿālamīn is genitive as an adjective, with the adjectival relation itself governing the adjective, as shown by adjectives whose case differs from their head. QURTUBI, d. 671 (الهروي وغيره): Al-Harawī and others say rabb can mean one who rectifies, manages, mends, or tends something to completion; they connect rabbāniyyūn with tending the books. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الهروي): Rabb also means one who repairs, manages, restores, or takes care of something; rabbani scholars are named for tending to scripture. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): God is Lord of the worlds as origin, preserver, and manager of all; worlds means everything known to God, and the sound masculine plural reflects encompassing knowledge or predominance. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Others treat rabb as the verbal noun rabba yarubbu, meaning owned or governed, functioning as an agent noun like a just or fasting man. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو زيد سعيد بن أوس الأنصاري): Abu Zayd reports rabb al-ʿālamīn in both nominative and accusative; successive adjectives may differ, with some governed by an implied verb and others by an implied subject, but not revert to genitive. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Other proposed governors are the expressed الحمد, a vocative, or a past-tense reading of rabb; al-Ālūsī objects to the first for its syntax and to the latter parses as awkward. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Recognizing God's unrestricted lordship separates clear monotheism from beliefs that combine one creator with multiple powers governing life. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Rabb al-alamin subsumes many divine qualities, since each name or attribute governs what it describes. TUSTARI: Al-Tustarī calls God creation's master, nurturer, caretaker, reformer and governor by prior knowledge, will, command and decree."}, {"id": "1:2/q08/p6", "position": "Rabb means the one worshipped.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (غاوي بن عبد العزى): Ghawy ibn ʿAbd al-ʿUzza's line uses Rabb for the one worshipped; Rabb of all in the unrestricted sense is God. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Since possible beings need God to bring them into existence and preserve them, He is their deity as creator and their Lord as sustainer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): “Lord of the worlds” signifies that God is one, owns all worlds, and is the only deity and object of worship. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Rabb can also mean the deity, as shown by a poet’s line about a lord upon whose head a fox urinates. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rabb can also mean the one worshipped; the cited poet mocks a fox worshipped after it soils an idol’s head. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Some polytheists claimed they worshipped lesser patrons only to bring them nearer to God, while some People of the Book treated their rabbis and monks as lords. | mentions 39:3, 9:31 IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (غاوي بن ظالم أو عباس بن مرداس): A pre-Islamic poet applies rabb to an idol, ridiculing a deity with a fox urinating on its head; al-Uzza was also called al-Rabba and the plural is ارباب. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God’s lordship over all entails that He alone is Lord, while exclusive worship and reliance affirm that there is no deity but Him."}, {"id": "1:2/q08/p7", "position": "Rabb denotes abiding.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (زيد بن علي وطائفة): Zayd ibn ʿAlī and a group read rabb al-ʿālamīn in the accusative as praise; the reading weakens if the following adjectives remain genitive. WAHIDI-BASIT: Theologians derive eternal lordship from remaining in place."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
