<<chunk 29, part 3 of 0..6>>
s rabb as master, reformer and owner, using poetry; Ibn ʿAbbās includes all creation. TAB-FULL: The text presents rabb as master, reformer and owner, using poetry; Ibn ʿAbbās includes all creation. NAHHAS: Al-Naḥḥās records extended forms of rabb. THALABI: Arabic and prophetic usages give rabb as master, owner, companion, pasture, nourisher, reformer or abiding one, with Joseph 12:42 and poetry. THALABI: Arabic and prophetic usages give rabb as master, owner, companion, pasture, nourisher, reformer or abiding one, with Joseph 12:42 and poetry. THALABI: Arabic and prophetic usages give rabb as master, owner, companion, pasture, nourisher, reformer or abiding one, with Joseph 12:42 and poetry. THALABI: Arabic and prophetic usages give rabb as master, owner, companion, pasture, nourisher, reformer or abiding one, with Joseph 12:42 and poetry. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī prefers abiding because God is eternally Lord; al-Wāsiṭī gives creator, nourisher and forgiver; unqualified al-Rabb is divine. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī prefers abiding because God is eternally Lord; al-Wāsiṭī gives creator, nourisher and forgiver; unqualified al-Rabb is divine. THALABI: Al-Thaʿlabī prefers abiding because God is eternally Lord; al-Wāsiṭī gives creator, nourisher and forgiver; unqualified al-Rabb is divine. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI: He lists owner, master, manager and nurturer, distinguishing essential and active attributes and restricting al-Rabb to God. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. MAWARDI-FULL: Owner, master, manager and nurturer are offered with Qurʾanic evidence and the essence/action distinction. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. WAHIDI-BASIT: Nurturing and completing are supported by al-Aṣmaʿī and poetry, while ownership and mastery are supported by Arabic speech, Ṣafwān and 12:42. JISHUMI: Rabb may mean master, owner or nurturer/reformer. BAGHAWI: Rabb means owner or nurturer and al-Rabb is exclusive to God; ʿālamīn is a plural without same-form singular. BAGHAWI: Rabb means owner or nurturer and al-Rabb is exclusive to God; ʿālamīn is a plural without same-form singular. BAGHAWI: Rabb means owner or nurturer and al-Rabb is exclusive to God; ʿālamīn is a plural without same-form singular. BAGHAWI: Rabb means owner or nurturer and al-Rabb is exclusive to God; ʿālamīn is a plural without same-form singular. BAGHAWI-FULL: Rabb means owner and nurturer; human usage is qualified. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord. IBNATIYYA: Rabb can mean deity, master, owner, manager, king or repairer; poetry and reports from Ṣafwān and Ibn ʿAbbās support the senses, but God alone is unrestricted Lord."}, {"id": "1:2/q08/p2", "position": "Rabb means owner.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): Rabb can mean the worshipped deity, master or owner, the one who manages and repairs affairs, or king; its absolute, unrestricted sense as Lord of lords belongs to God alone. TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): The Prophet uses rabb to mean owner, asking a man whether he owns sheep or camels. TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو ذؤيب): Abu Dhu'ayb uses rabb in the sense of companion or owner of the dogs. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Rabb has three uses: owner, one who sets something right, and an obeyed master; the last is illustrated by Joseph 12:41. | mentions 12:41 IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Rabb means owner; for a created being the title is used only in a construct phrase such as owner of the house or servant. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The lām in lillāh can signify fitting اختصاص, ownership, or power and dominion; each makes all praise belong to God. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Rabb means owner; al-Ṣiḥāḥ says it is a divine name used of others only in an annexed construction, though pre-Islamic Arabs also used it for a king. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): With the definite article, Rabb is specific to God; without it, the term can apply to God or a servant, but God alone owns owners and owned things, creates and provides, and cannot lose His dominion as human owners can. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): With the definite article, Rabb belongs exclusively to God; without it, people may be called a household’s lord. God alone creates and provides, owns both owners and owned things, and cannot lose His dominion. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rabb means owner; lexically it is a divine name, used of others only in a possessive construction, though pre-Islamic Arabs also used it for a king. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): Rabb is used absolutely only of God, while for human masters it is restricted by a possessive phrase, as in Joseph’s story; al-Wasiti explains God as creator at the beginning, sustainer, and forgiver at the end. | mentions 12:23, 12:50 NASAFI, d. 710 (author): Rabb means owner; the cited exchange has Safwan tell Abu Sufyan that being owned by a Qurayshi is preferable to being owned by a Hawazini. Rabb can also be a verbal noun used intensively as an adjective. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Rabb means owner or master; the source cites Safwan telling Abu Sufyan that being ruled by a Quraysh man is preferable to being ruled by a Hawazin man, and allows “rabb” as an intensive verbal noun. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): God is owner at the final return and recompense; only the worshipped one to whom sovereignty returns can reward enduring blessing for perishable life, as servants shed acts and attributes and receive true existence after annihilation. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Rabb may be a verbal noun used adjectivally or an active participle with deleted alif; as a title it is exclusive to God, while others require a possessive complement. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): The lām can express possession, transfer of ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, exclamation, specification, result, location, endpoint, and superiority; Qur'anic and Arabic examples illustrate these functions. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 7:57, 17:107 ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Rabb can mean master, owner, constant one, deity, or reformer; some add “companion,” supported by a poem about the master of the dogs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The lām in lillāh has numerous possible relations, including ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, specification, outcome, time, endpoint, and elevation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Rabb may mean master, owner, abiding one, worshipp
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
