<<chunk 30, part 0 of 0..0>>
{"id": "1:2/q09", "question": "How is rabb read and parsed?", "turns_on": "Whether rabb follows Allāh in the genitive or detaches in the accusative or nominative.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q09/p1", "position": "Rabb is read accusative as detached praise.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (بعضهم): Some read Rabb in the accusative as a form of praise. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (بعضهم): Others take accusative Rabb as direct address, parallel to the implied address in “You alone.” TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Rabb al-ʿālamīn may be accusative as praise or as an implied command to remember the Lord; a nominative praise reading is also possible, as poetry shows. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الجمهور): Most readers put rabb in the genitive; Abū al-Ghāliya, Ibn al-Sumayfa, and ʿĪsā ibn ʿUmar read it in the accusative; several others use nominative. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Rabb may be read in the nominative by syntactic disconnection, meaning He is Lord of the worlds, or in the accusative as a word of praise. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (زيد بن علي وطائفة): Zayd ibn ʿAlī and a group read rabb al-ʿālamīn in the accusative as praise; the reading weakens if the following adjectives remain genitive. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (الأهوازي): Al-Ahwāzī reports Zayd ibn ʿAlī reading rabb, raḥmān, and raḥīm all in the accusative, avoiding the mismatch in case. | mentions 1:3 ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects parsing accusative rabb as an implied verb of praise or as apposition: one rests on imagined syntax, the other is interrupted by raḥmān raḥīm. | mentions 1:3 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects deriving the accusative rabb from a prior implied verb such as We praise God, since this analogy to ellipsis in coordination is not productive. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (زيد بن علي وطائفة): Zayd ibn ʿAlī and a group read rabb al-ʿālamīn in the accusative as praise, though lowering the following epithets weakens the construction. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الأهوازي): Al-Ahwāzī records Zayd ibn ʿAlī reading rabb, raḥmān, and raḥīm all in the accusative, which removes the syntactic weakness. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو زيد سعيد بن أوس الأنصاري): Abu Zayd reports rabb al-ʿālamīn in both nominative and accusative; successive adjectives may differ, with some governed by an implied verb and others by an implied subject, but not revert to genitive. ALUSI, d. 1270 (زيد بن علي): Zayd b. ʿAlī is reported to read rabb al-ʿālamīn in the accusative; the author’s preferred parse is an accusative of detachment with an implied verb such as أمدح. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (زيد بن علي): A reading attributed to Zayd ibn ʿAli puts Rabb al-ʿalamin in the accusative; al-Alusi finds the first grammatical explanation, an implied praise or mention verb, most apparent. NAHHAS: Al-Kisāʾī allows accusative praise, Abū Ḥātim supplies a verb, Abū Isḥāq proposes vocative, Ibn Kaysān rejects vocative, and nominative 'He is Lord' is also possible. NAHHAS: Al-Kisāʾī allows accusative praise, Abū Ḥātim supplies a verb, Abū Isḥāq proposes vocative, Ibn Kaysān rejects vocative, and nominative 'He is Lord' is also possible. NAHHAS: Al-Kisāʾī allows accusative praise, Abū Ḥātim supplies a verb, Abū Isḥāq proposes vocative, Ibn Kaysān rejects vocative, and nominative 'He is Lord' is also possible. NAHHAS: Al-Kisāʾī allows accusative praise, Abū Ḥātim supplies a verb, Abū Isḥāq proposes vocative, Ibn Kaysān rejects vocative, and nominative 'He is Lord' is also possible. NAHHAS: Al-Kisāʾī allows accusative praise, Abū Ḥātim supplies a verb, Abū Isḥāq proposes vocative, Ibn Kaysān rejects vocative, and nominative 'He is Lord' is also possible. THALABI: Zayd reads rabb accusative as praise, while the usual genitive describes creator, originator, owner and manager. THALABI: Zayd reads rabb accusative as praise, while the usual genitive describes creator, originator, owner and manager. THALABI: Abū Saʿīd supplies 'I praise the Lord of the worlds'. KASHSHAF-FULL: Zayd's reading is introduced. IBNATIYYA: Accusative rabb may be praise or vocative aligned with 1:5. IBNATIYYA: Accusative rabb may be praise or vocative aligned with 1:5. IBNATIYYA: Accusative rabb may be praise or vocative aligned with 1:5. Al-Zajjāj allows accusative rabb al-ʿālamīn in ordinary speech as detached praise with an implied ‘I mention the Lord of the worlds’; he cites an unnamed poet to show that accusative epithets may follow a preceding noun or serve as praise, and says grammarians accept these case combinations."}, {"id": "1:2/q09/p2", "position": "Rabb is read accusative as direct address.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): The accusative rabb al-ʿālamīn is analyzed as praise, a vocative, or an implied verb indicated by “praise.” SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The common reading makes rabb genitive as an adjective or appositive to Allah; accusative allows an implied I praise, a detached praise, or vocative, with vocative weakest because it separates adjective from noun; nominative is detached predicate huwa rabb. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Rabb al-ʿālamīn is read genitive as an adjective, nominative with an implicit subject, or accusative with an implicit verb or as a vocative. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Other proposed governors are the expressed الحمد, a vocative, or a past-tense reading of rabb; al-Ālūsī objects to the first for its syntax and to the latter parses as awkward. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Other proposed parses take Rabb as a vocative or a past-tense verb, but al-Alusi finds the vocative unclear and the verbal reading syntactically remote."}, {"id": "1:2/q09/p3", "position": "Rabb is genitive as a description of Allāh.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash says rabb al-ʿālamīn is genitive as an adjective, with the adjectival relation itself governing the adjective, as shown by adjectives whose case differs from their head. TABRISI, d. 548 (زيد بن علي): Zayd ibn Ali's fatḥa on the bā of rabb is understood as demonstrating that the form is possible, not as a recitation. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): The doxology was already used in the early Meccan period; in middle Meccan texts it is joined to the epithet rabb al-ʿālamīn, itself attested early. | mentions 52:48, 37:182, 39:75, 83:6, 81:27, 81:29, 69:43, 68:52, 56:80 JISHUMI: Rabb's case is discussed with its senses, while al-ḥamd's article is generic. JISHUMI: Rabb's case is discussed with its senses, while al-ḥamd's article is generic. JISHUMI: Rabb's case is discussed with its senses, while al-ḥamd's article is generic. Al-Zajjāj allows genitive rabb as continuation in ordinary speech and cites an unnamed poet for epithets that follow the preceding noun. He says the Qurʾan chooses the best and most eloquent wording, the genitive sequence rabb al-ʿālamīn al-raḥmān al-raḥīm, despite other case forms being possible in ordinary speech."}, {"id": "1:2/q09/p4", "position": "Rabb is read nominative with an implied subject.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو رزين العقيلي والربيع بن خيثم وأبو عمران الجوني): These readers pronounce the bāʾ of rabb in the nominative. Al-Zajjāj explains nominative rabb al-ʿālamīn as ‘He is the Lord of the worlds’; his unnamed poetic example illustrates how nominative epithets may state ‘they are the ones,’ among case combinations accepted by grammarians."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
