<<chunk 32, part 0 of 0..2>>
{"id": "1:2/q11", "question": "How is al-ʿālamīn formed and derived?", "turns_on": "Whether ʿālam is a sign, a means of knowledge, or a collective; how its sound plural is justified.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q11/p1", "position": "ʿĀlam derives from a sign pointing to the Creator.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj derives ʿālam from knowledge or a sign because the world points to its maker; ʿālamīn encompasses all beings besides God, including human and jinn realms. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): In al-ʿālamīn, yā is both the plural and case marker, while nūn replaces the singular's case vowel and is opened to distinguish it from the dual. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Al-ʿālamīn has no singular of the same form and may derive from the mark by which creation points to its Maker, or from knowledge as what is known. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): Some derive ʿālam from ʿalāma, a sign pointing to its Creator; that derivation supports taking it for all created existence. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أهل النظر): The derivation of ʿālam from ʿalāma, “sign,” supports the speculative theologians' view: the world is named as a sign pointing to its Creator. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The sequence assigns praise to God, then names Him Lord of the worlds: Allah signifies necessary perfection, while Lord of the worlds shows that all else flows from His generosity, making Him beyond completeness. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): “Lord of the worlds” signifies that God is one, owns all worlds, and is the only deity and object of worship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Raising the hands signals leaving both worlds and directing all inner faculties toward God; “God is greatest” means He exceeds all beings, knowledge, comparison, and even the claim that He is simply greater. QURTUBI, d. 671 (الزجاج والخليل): Al-Zajjāj derives ʿālam from knowledge or a sign: it is everything God created in this life and the next and it points to its maker and planner; al-Khalīl likewise says a sign or marker indicates a thing. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): ʿĀlam means what makes something known, like a signet or mold; it came to denote all besides God, substances and accidents, whose contingency indicates the necessary Creator. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers that al-ʿālamīn denote morally responsible beings, supported by the verse about signs for the knowledgeable; Ḥafṣ's kasra on the lām clarifies the sense. | mentions 30:22 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): Ibn Kathir says ʿālam derives from ʿalāmah, a sign, because every created thing points to its Maker, Creator, and oneness; he cites a poem by Ibn al-Mu'tazz. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Some restrict the worlds to rational beings among angels, humans, and jinn; al-Suyūṭī associates this reading with ʿilm, while universal scope fits ʿalāma, sign. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Although ʿālamīn is a sound masculine plural, it can cover nonrational beings if the word is restricted to rational creatures, if rational beings predominate, or if the others are treated as signs of knowledge. | mentions 41:11, 12:4 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Some say al-ʿālamīn is a plural restricted to rational beings; replies derive it from rational ʿālam after restriction, from grammatical predominance, or by treating knowledgeable signs as rational. | mentions 41:11, 12:4 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الإمام الأسيوطي): Al-Suyuti derives the term from knowledge when the worlds are understood generally, and from a sign when the term is taken in its broader sense. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The masculine sound plural can denote paucity despite the many worlds, underscoring that all are insignificant beside God's majesty; Arabic usage can also allow either number. | mentions 39:67 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The sign in al-alamin, later clarified by al-Baqara’s description of the Qur’an as guidance for the Godfearing, signals the wisdom of revelation. | mentions 2:2 CORPUSCORANICUM (author): Although ʿālamīn’s sound plural cannot mean worlds morphologically, it can designate a collective of people. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (بعضهم): Some limit al-alamin to knowledgeable or morally responsible creatures, citing its use for those who receive warning and recognize signs. | mentions 25:1, 30:22 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Al-Fatiha's concise Rabb al-alamin fits its focus on accountable creatures, whereas al-Jathiya explicitly names heaven and earth after repeatedly detailing their signs and God's rule over them. | mentions 45:3, 45:4, 45:13, 45:22, 45:27, 45:36"}, {"id": "1:2/q11/p2", "position": "The plural endings mark case and number.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash says rabb al-ʿālamīn is genitive as an adjective, with the adjectival relation itself governing the adjective, as shown by adjectives whose case differs from their head. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The phrase al-ḥamdu lillāh raises questions about God’s existence and right to praise; Rabb al-ʿālamīn answers the first, while al-Raḥmān, al-Raḥīm, and Mālik yawm al-dīn answer the second. QURTUBI, d. 671 (الربيع بن أنس عن أبي العالية): Al-Rabīʿ ibn Anas transmits from Abū al-ʿĀliya that jinn and humans are worlds and that each of earth’s four corners contains 1,500 worlds created to worship God. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya says al-ʿālamīn means the two classes of moral beings, humans and jinn. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya restricts al-ʿālamīn to the two responsible kinds, humans and jinn. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Although al-ʿālamīn is an irregular plural, Abū Ḥayyān favors the responsible creatures because a cited verse and Ḥafṣ's lām-kasra reading support that scope. | mentions 29:44 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliyah says humans and jinn are worlds and reports uncertainty between fourteen and eighteen thousand other angelic worlds on earth, in groups worshipping God. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (تبيع الحميري): Tubyay al-Himyari says the worlds comprise one thousand nations, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (سعيد بن المسيب): A similar count of one thousand worlds, divided into six hundred sea and four hundred land worlds, is also attributed to Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (سعيد بن المسيب): Al-Baghawi reports Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab's view that God has one thousand worlds, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land. NASHR, d. 833 (قتيبة عن الكسائي، كردم عن نافع، ورش): The author adds unlisted transmissions: Qutayba from al-Kisa'i has imāla in al-ʿālamīn and al-raḥmān; Kurram from Nafi and al-Ahwazi from Warsh lengthen vowels in mālik, naʿbudu, and iyyāka. DURR, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Abu al-ʿAliya counts humans and jinn as two worlds and says there are another eighteen thousand worlds of angels; each of earth's four corners has 3,500 worlds created to worship God. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya says humans and jinn are two worlds and there are eighteen thousand other worlds of angels, with 3,500 worshipping worlds at each of the earth's four corners. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Al-alamin is the plural of alam; few nouns on fa'il take this plural, with yasm (jasmine) the other example, whose plurals occur in al-A'sha's verse. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Al-Jathiya repeatedly discusses God's lordship over the heavens, earth, creation, and worlds; its closing praise gathers these themes, unlike al-Fatiha's focus on the worlds and their accountable groups. | mentions 45:4, 45:27, 45:36 AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. AKHFASH: Al-Akhfash explains wāw/yāʾ cases, the added open nūn and its loss in annexation; he contrasts the dual and broken plurals and cites 5:23 and 36:14. NAHHAS: Sībawayh, Abū al-ʿAbbās and Abū Isḥāq disagree whether the nūn replaces case vowel, tanwīn, or both; the fatḥa distinguishes dual. NAHHAS: Sībawayh, Abū al-ʿAbbās and Abū Isḥāq disagree whether the nūn replaces case vowel, tanwīn, or both; the fatḥa distinguishes dual. NAHHAS: Sībawayh, Abū al-ʿAbbās and Abū Isḥāq disagree whether the nūn replaces case vowel, tanwīn, or both; the fatḥa distinguishes dual. NAHHAS: Sībawayh, Abū al-ʿAbbās and Abū Isḥāq disagree whether the nūn replaces case vowel, tanwīn, or both; the fatḥa distinguishes dual. NAHHAS: Sībawayh, Abū al-ʿAbbās and Abū Isḥāq disagree whether the nūn replaces case vowel, tanwīn, or both; the fatḥa distinguishes dual. Al-Zajjāj reports Sibawayh’s explanation that the plural nūn has fatḥa to distinguish it from the dual nūn with kasra. Al-Zajjāj adds that fatḥa also resolves two adjacent still letters, since kasra after wāw or yāʾ is heavy, and cites sawfa and ayna Zayd as analogies."}, {"id": "1:2/q11/p3", "position": "ʿĀlam relates to knowledge.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): Another derivation connects ʿālam to knowledge, supporting Ibn ʿAbbās’s interpretation. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The worlds comprise all substances and accidents, whose possibility and need for a necessary cause show God's existence; the plural gathers different genera, with rational beings predominant in its form. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): The plural ending -in is used although normally associated with rational beings or their equivalent because ‘alamin has an a
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
