<<chunk 32, part 1 of 0..2>>
djectival sense, indicating knowledge. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Al-ʿālamīn denotes what makes the Creator known—bodies, substances, and accidents—or every existent apart from God; its sound masculine plural reflects a descriptive quality associated with rational beings. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): God is Lord of the worlds as origin, preserver, and manager of all; worlds means everything known to God, and the sound masculine plural reflects encompassing knowledge or predominance. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Al-alamin is an annexed sound masculine plural in form but an ism-jam because its singular differs; it cannot be plural of alam if that covers all non-divine beings while al-alamin means rational beings only. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Sibawayh similarly says a'rab is not plural of arab because the former is narrower; an objection that al-alamin could mean only rational alam is answered by comparison with the unavailable form shay'un. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Some commentators restrict the worlds to beings with knowledge: angels and the two accountable species, humans and jinn. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The sound plural al-alamin foregrounds rational beings; a concise Turkish rendering is difficult, but it means God alone is Lord of all realms and especially their rational inhabitants. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The sound rational plural and the definite article extend the meaning across all realms and foreground rational beings; understanding the Lord of the worlds requires conceiving rational agents. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The plural uses the rational masculine form even though some worlds are nonrational, by giving precedence to rational beings. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): This plural suits al-Fatiha because its worship, aid, guidance, and moral categories address accountable creatures; Rabb al-alamin may mean their Lord or all creation with rational beings predominant. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Al-Kahf's revelation nurtures souls with knowledge, a particular form of the general nurture expressed by Rabb al-alamin. | mentions 18:1"}, {"id": "1:2/q11/p4", "position": "ʿĀlamīn is a collective plural.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (قتادة): Qatāda says al-ʿālamīn is the plural of ʿālam and means every existing thing other than God, with no singular on this pattern, like rahṭ or qawm. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): The article in al-ʿālamīn is exhaustive; ʿālam is an irregular collective and its sound masculine plural is even more irregular because it violates some conditions of that pattern. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The suggestion that ʿālamīn is a unique collective noun on the pattern of sound plurals does not settle its form; the author distinguishes ordinary plurals, collective generics, and collective nouns. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Another debate asks whether al-ʿālamīn is a regular plural, a collective noun, or a name for a totality; al-Ālūsī concludes it is a true plural because each member is itself called an ʿālam. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī calls ʿālam a collective class or generation, comparing anām, rahṭ and jaysh and citing al-ʿAjjāj. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī calls ʿālam a collective class or generation, comparing anām, rahṭ and jaysh and citing al-ʿAjjāj. TAB-FULL: Each class and generation forms a world; al-ʿAjjāj's line illustrates. TAB-FULL: Each class and generation forms a world; al-ʿAjjāj's line illustrates. THALABI: It has no singular of the same form. MAWARDI-FULL: The text compares rahṭ and qawm and cites al-ʿAjjāj. MAWARDI-FULL: The text compares rahṭ and qawm and cites al-ʿAjjāj. Al-Zajjāj says al-ʿālamīn has no singular of its own form because it gathers unlike kinds, whereas a single ʿālam gathers members of one kind."}, {"id": "1:2/q11/p5", "position": "ʿĀlamīn is the plural of ʿālam.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن عباس وسعيد بن جبير وقتادة): Most commentators take each species and each generation of a species as a world, so al-ʿālamīn is plural across kinds and times. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أهل العربية): For Arab grammarians, ʿālamīn is the plural of ʿālam and names all created beings from beginning to end; people also call their present age a world. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): Al-ʿālamīn is the plural of ʿālam, encompassing every created being besides God; created kinds in heavens, earth, land, and sea are worlds, as is each generation. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Although the sound masculine plural often denotes a small number, the form here hints that all created worlds remain few beside God’s greatness; the plural can also denote many. | mentions 39:67 ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The definite plural makes the scope of divine lordship explicit across every created kind; singular al-ʿālam might be mistaken for the familiar perceptible world alone. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The plural al-ʿālamīn guarantees inclusion of every created kind: a singular definite noun could be heard as the familiar perceptible world, whereas the plural distributes lordship across all named kinds and their individuals. MAJAZ: Abū ʿUbayda takes the worlds as created beings and cites Labīd and al-ʿAjjāj for the singular. MAJAZ: Abū ʿUbayda takes the worlds as created beings and cites Labīd and al-ʿAjjāj for the singular. Al-Zajjāj explicitly calls al-ʿālamīn the plural of ʿālam, distinguishing its gathered kinds from the members grouped in one ʿālam."}]}
{"id": "1:2/q12", "question": "How many worlds are reported?", "turns_on": "The reports give distinct counts and some hold that only God knows the number.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q12/p1", "position": "A report counts eighteen thousand worlds.", "reasons": "QURTUBI, d. 671 (وهب بن منبه): Wahb ibn Munabbih says God has eighteen thousand worlds, of which this world is one. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (وهب بن منبه): Wahb ibn Munabbih says God has eighteen thousand worlds and this world is one of them. DURR, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Abu al-ʿAliya counts humans and jinn as two worlds and says there are another eighteen thousand worlds of angels; each of earth's four corners has 3,500 worlds created to worship God. DURR, d. 911 (وهب): Wahb says God has eighteen thousand worlds, of which this world is only one. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya says humans and jinn are two worlds and there are eighteen thousand other worlds of angels, with 3,500 worshipping worlds at each of the earth's four corners. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (وهب): Wahb says God has eighteen thousand worlds, of which this world is only one. DURR, d. 911 (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy ibn Kaʿb identifies the worlds as angels, numbering eighteen thousand; four regions each have four or five hundred angels, each with innumerable helpers. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبي كعب): Ubayy ibn Kab identifies the worlds as angels, numbering eighteen thousand; he describes groups in four regions with countless attendants. THALABI: Wahb likens the inhabited portion to a tent in a desert. BAGHAWI: Wahb says the known world is only one. BAGHAWI-FULL: Wahb's tent-in-desert image emphasizes the known world's smallness."}, {"id": "1:2/q12/p2", "position": "A report counts one thousand worlds or communities.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (تبيع الحميري): Tubyay al-Himyari says the worlds comprise one thousand nations, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (سعيد بن المسيب): A similar count of one thousand worlds, divided into six hundred sea and four hundred land worlds, is also attributed to Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (سعيد بن المسيب): Al-Baghawi reports Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab's view that God has one thousand worlds, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land. DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): A weak report from Jabir recounts Umar's search for locusts and a prophetic saying that God made a thousand communities, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land; locusts are the first to perish, after which the others follow like a broken necklace. DURR, d. 911 (تتبع الجهري): Al-Tatabbuʿ al-Jahri says the worlds are a thousand communities, six hundred in the sea and four hundred on land. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A weak report says God created a thousand communities, 600 in the sea and 400 on land; locusts are the first to perish, followed by the rest like beads when their string breaks. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (تتبع الجهري): A report counts the worlds as a thousand communities, 600 in the sea and 400 on land. IBNABIHATIM: Tabīʿ divides the worlds into six hundred sea and four hundred land communities. THALABI: Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib gives six hundred sea and four hundred land worlds. BAGHAWI: Six hundred are sea and four hundred land. BAGHAWI-FULL: Saʿīd gives 600 sea and 400 land."}, {"id": "1:2/q12/p3", "position": "Only God can know or count the worlds.", "reasons": "RAZI, d. 606 (author): Razi says there is no proof that bodies are limited to the familiar cosmic categories: since an infinite void lies beyond the world and God can do all possible things, He can create countless external worlds, each larger than this one and containing analogous heavens, earths and celestial bodies. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Rāzī says there is no proof that only the familiar kinds of bodies exist: an infinite void lies beyond this world, and God can create innumerable greater worlds containing counterparts of its cosmic features; philosophers’ arguments for one world rely on weak premises. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi prefers the universal sense because the worlds are innumerable and God's nurturing encompasses every existing thing, both celestial and earthly. | mentions 16:8, 74:31 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (كعب الأحبار): Kaʿb al-Aḥbār says only God can count the number of worlds. | mentions 16:8, 74:31 THALABI: Muqātil says fully explaining the worlds would require a thousand volumes of a thousand pages. THALABI: Kaʿb says only God can count the worlds, citing 74:31. BAGHAWI: Kaʿb says only God knows the worlds' number, citing 74:31. BAGHAWI-FULL: Kaʿb says only God knows the number of worlds
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
