<<chunk 33, part 15 of 0..15>>
lute accusative, as in 'we praise God with praise'; the verbal noun replaces the verb. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The subject is deliberately fronted because another familiar formula could place the predicate first; the choice itself signals emphasis. | mentions 45:36 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): God placed praise before the supplication, following Arabic eloquence in which requests to great people begin with commendation. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (سيبويه): For hamdan or shukran, an understood verb such as “I praise” is omitted because the source itself stands in its place, as in the established supplicatory formulas. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The al in al-hamd is generic: because the verbal noun stands in place of an action, the definite form presents the kind of praise as familiar and makes it prominent, rather than identifying one instance. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Creatures cannot comprehend God's perfection; their praise would limit Him to their understanding, so they must first declare Him transcendent of what they delimit. | mentions 42:5, 17:44, 20:110, 16:74 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God is praiseworthy in His essence, lordship, rightly placed mercy, and ownership of Judgment Day; the sequence spans all times from eternity through the endless afterlife. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The sequence praises God for His essence, lordship, properly placed mercy, and ownership and kingship on the day of recompense."}, {"id": "1:2/q13/p4", "position": "The verse bears on the source of faith and human acts.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Jabriyya argue that if humans created faith, the human would deserve more praise for this noblest act than God; therefore God creates faith. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Jabriyya argue that Muslims praise God for the blessing of faith; if faith were a human act, praising God for it would wrongly credit Him with another’s act. | mentions 3:188 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Jabriyya argue that obligatory acts only avert blame and cannot earn praise, while voluntary grace would make God gain praise and thus be perfected by another. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الجبرية): The Jabriyya infer that faith too comes from God: all praise belongs to Him, praise follows blessing, and faith is the greatest blessing. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الجبرية): They argue that God’s self-praise, though blameworthy among people, shows divine acts cannot be judged by human standards and challenges Muʿtazilī principles. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila say absolute praise is deserved by one whose acts contain no evil, rulings no injustice, and judgments no oppression; they reject the Jabriyya picture of God creating disbelief then punishing it. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (القدرية): The Qadariyya argue that God would not truly be Lord if He created a disbeliever’s unbelief and then punished him, or commanded faith while preventing it. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الجبرية): The Jabriyya answer that faith is the greatest blessing, so if it comes from God He is the Lord and benefactor of all. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): Muslims agree that God is praised for all blessings, including faith; since faith belongs to the created worlds, Qurtubi infers that faith is God’s act and creation, contrary to the Qadari claim that humans create it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Muslims agree God is praised for all blessings; since faith is a blessing and belongs among all created things, faith is God’s act and creation, against the Qadariyya. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): For Nasafi, the definite article in al-hamd is comprehensive, against the Mu‘tazila; its attachment to Allah, the name of the divine essence, gathers all perfections and reflects the doctrine of created acts. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The definite article in al-hamd is exhaustive according to the author's school, against the Mu'tazila; joining it to Allah's proper name gathers every perfection and rests on the doctrine of created acts. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Some tie the generic reading to the Muʿtazilī account that human actions belong to their agents; al-Ālūsī replies that good acts still depend on God’s enabling and empowering. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): One argument says Muʿtazilīs assign praise for human deeds to humans because they create their acts; the reply is that even good deeds depend on God’s power and enabling, so praise ultimately returns to Him. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Even on the Muʿtazilī account, people’s praise does not displace God’s: He enables their acts and bestows the conditions, while their own agency merits a distinct, lesser praise. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الأكثر): The question is how a contingent human act of praise can be for God without inhering in Him; relation to an object does not entail inherence, as knowledge relates to its objects."}, {"id": "1:2/q13/p5", "position": "The verse bears on the duty of gratitude.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Rāzī argues that gratitude is due at all times, even before revelation: the verse makes praise God’s right without qualification and grounds it in His nurturing and mercy. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الإمام): An argument for rational gratitude before revelation says the verse establishes God's praiseworthiness through creation, mercy, and future judgment; al-Alusi replies that this proof itself is scriptural, not rational. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi says deriving the duty of gratitude from God's own revealed declaration only proves it through revelation, so it cannot establish a pre-revelation rational duty. JISHUMI: Al-Jishumī says praise and gratitude are obligatory within one's capacity for past and future blessings. JISHUMI: Al-Jishumī says praise and gratitude are obligatory within one's capacity for past and future blessings."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
