<<chunk 33, part 14 of 0..15>>
ter, arranger, and possessor; of God it means peerless Master who orders affairs and owns creation. STUDYQURAN (author): Some relate rabb to cultivation: God is caretaker and trainer of things and of human souls, hearts, and spirits. STUDYQURAN (author): Shiite law permits reciting the Fātiḥah in the third and fourth cycles or an alternative formula praising God. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): The Prophet identifies the Fātiḥah as the greatest sūrah, calling it Praise be to God and the seven oft-repeated, and linking it to 15:87. | mentions 15:87 STUDYQURAN (God): In a hadith qudsī, God responds to the servant’s praise, magnification, and glorification during the prayer, which is divided between them. STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah is a prayer encapsulating metaphysical and eschatological realities and teaches the proper human disposition toward God. STUDYQURAN (author): Its structure moves from God’s nature in the first three verses, through the God-human relationship, to human states in the final three. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars reject a Medinan origin because Muslims needed the sūrah to perform obligatory prayers. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Fātiḥah means The Opening: it opens the Book, each prayer cycle, many everyday acts, and may open the breast to faith. STUDYQURAN (author): It is called the Mother of the Quran because it contains the meaning of the entire Quran. KASHSHAF-FULL: Lordship, ownership, universal beneficence and final authority warrant praise."}, {"id": "1:2/q13/p2", "position": "God sustains every contingent being.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Knowledge of God’s existence is theoretical, not immediate; the world of heavens, earth, seas, minerals, plants, and animals needs a governing, originating, nurturing, and sustaining cause. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-ʿālamīn includes everything besides God, which depends on Him for existence and continuance; every indivisible particle and individual accident proves the wise, powerful God. | mentions 17:44 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Rāzī prefers Rabb al-ʿālamīn to Creator of the worlds because sustaining creatures after their beginning is disputed, and the phrase stresses their dependence on God at every moment. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Anʿām’s praise for creating the heavens, earth, darkness, and light is one subset of Rabb al-ʿālamīn; dependence on God for preservation entails dependence for origination. | mentions 6:1 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Since possible beings need God to bring them into existence and preserve them, He is their deity as creator and their Lord as sustainer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The ascent continues through ever-higher spiritual ranks until God, the source of all good and mercy; thus the spirit-world is the unseen and God's presence the unseen of the unseen. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Another derivation makes rabb a descriptive form from rabba-yarubbuhu; it then means owner because an owner preserves and nurtures what is owned. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Contingent things need an originator at coming-to-be and a sustainer for as long as they exist. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): Rabb is used absolutely only of God, while for human masters it is restricted by a possessive phrase, as in Joseph’s story; al-Wasiti explains God as creator at the beginning, sustainer, and forgiver at the end. | mentions 12:23, 12:50 NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (الواسطى): Al-Wasiti explains Rabb as creator at the beginning, sustainer through nourishment, and forgiver at the end, and calls it God's greatest name. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): God is Lord of the worlds as origin, preserver, and manager of all; worlds means everything known to God, and the sound masculine plural reflects encompassing knowledge or predominance. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): God's lordship and mercy make Him worthy of praise; lordship as mastery or ownership is followed fittingly by mercy, which sustains servants' hope after failure. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (مسعود التفتازاني): Al-Taftazani maps the Fatiha's blessings to two creations and t wo preservations: creation in Rabb al-alamin, preservation in mercy, second creation in judgment, and afterlife preservation in worship onward. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عائشة): During a drought prayer, the Prophet invoked God as Lord of the worlds, the Merciful, and Master of Judgment, asking for rain that would sustain them; Abu Dawud calls the report rare with a good chain, and says it supports the Medinan no-alif reading. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Every possible being remains under God’s nurture: without the continuing influx of divine support and the removal of every impediment, it would return to nonexistence. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Because contingent beings need a cause both to begin and to persist, continual divine preservation is itself tarbiya; keeping even indefinitely many possible obstacles absent sustains a thing. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Words often become conventionally narrow because one instance is common or other instances are unknown; this can obscure Qur’anic and Prophetic meanings that preserve original lexical breadth. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Praise is like the head because speech makes meaning clearest, and the head is the most evident, elevated, and sustaining member; this may explain why God names praise first. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī argues that comprehensiveness fits this passage’s total lordship, mercy, and continuing sovereignty; he contrasts it with another surah whose relevant details are absent. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī prefers the nominative nominal sentence because, in context, it expresses established and continuing praise, whereas a verbal sentence ordinarily presents renewed action; permanence also depends on context, not form alone. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Every contingent being depends on God's continual nurturing for existence and persistence; sustaining it also means keeping all its possible impediments absent. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Quṭb contrasts Islam's continuing divine care with Aristotle's alleged view that God creates the cosmos and then ignores it as beneath His attention. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): In Arabic, rabb can mean master or the one who manages, reforms, and nurtures; God continuously tends every creature rather than leaving the universe unattended. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): With the definite article, rabb is used in the Qur'an exclusively for God, sole sustainer of all creation and ultimate authority. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): To preserve the eschatological dimension, translate rabb al-ʿālamīn as Lord of the worlds, with people implied; translate it simply as people where that reference is explicit. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God originates heaven and earth from nothing, creates by measuring and shaping, owns them and their contents, sustains and repairs them, and sends scripture to guide creation. | mentions 3:49 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): These openings jointly describe God as originator, shaper, owner, sustainer, and guide through revealed books; Rabb al-alamin encompasses all these qualities and worlds. | mentions 6:1, 18:1, 34:1, 35:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Rabb highlights that creation depends on God not only when it begins but also while it continues, a dependence disputed for things in their state of persistence. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Rabb al-alamin is the apt continuation after praise: Rabb means owner, master, educator, benefactor, and caretaker, and encompasses God's attributes. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The opening attributes span all time: praise before creation, at creation, through continuing mercy, and through the unending recompense of the afterlife, as 28:70 says. | mentions 28:70 STUDYQURAN (author): The point beneath bāʾ can symbolize the Divine Pen’s first drop of ink, which inscribed all archetypes on the Preserved Tablet before creation; thus basmalah marks both Quranic and cosmic beginnings. | mentions 68:1, 96:4, 85:22"}, {"id": "1:2/q13/p3", "position": "The Lord of all worlds transcends created place.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Because worlds include everything besides God, including space and time, their Lord created them and existed before them; this proves His transcendence beyond place, direction, and spatial extension. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The same lordship excludes indwelling: the creator precedes every created locus and therefore never depends on a place, against Christians and adherents of indwelling. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The world's evident order and its fitness for human interests show that its maker knows; praise thus implies God's existence, transcendence from place and indwelling, and utmost power, knowledge, and wisdom. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Praise precedes tasbīḥ because it includes transcendence and adds God’s beneficence, making Him beyond mere completeness. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer seeks remembrance of the heart, and this concise surah gathers lordship and servitude and is equated with the mighty Qur'an; nothing else can replace it. | mentions 20:14, 15:87 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The opening glorification reveals the lights of divine majesty and moves from declaring God's transcendence to praising Him. QURTUBI, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Another view makes praise broader because it includes both gratitude and commendation, can stand in place of gratitude, and is not itself replaced by gratitude. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Al-Fatiha begins in gratitude, places humans in the worlds under a hidden divine relation, renews the manifestation of mercy, and trains consciousness through truth and instruction until people recognize God and themselves. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Because human power cannot detail every relation, he will sketch them in places and pause especially over al-Fatiha. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (سيبويه): Sibawayhi explains that praise expressions originally use an omitted verb in the abso
<<part 14 ends; continues in part 15>>
