<<chunk 34, part 2 of 0..4>>
 d. 1393 (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports in Muslim and other collections that the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar began recitation with al-Hamdu lillah and did not mention the basmala at either end. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (عبد الله بن مغفل): Ibn Mughaffal says he prayed with the Prophet and the first three caliphs but never heard them say the basmala, and directs worshippers to recite al-Hamdu lillah. STUDYQURAN (author): Muslims use the basmalah to consecrate actions at their beginning and al-ḥamd to thank God upon completion; etiquette answers any inquiry about one’s condition with praise. STUDYQURAN (ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib): A saying attributed to ʿAlī compresses the Quran into the Fātiḥah, the basmalah, its opening bāʾ, and the diacritical point beneath it. STUDYQURAN (author): The point beneath bāʾ can symbolize the Divine Pen’s first drop of ink, which inscribed all archetypes on the Preserved Tablet before creation; thus basmalah marks both Quranic and cosmic beginnings. | mentions 68:1, 96:4, 85:22 ʿAlī counts the basmala as a verse when challenged that al-Ḥamd has only six verses; Abū Hurayra reports a seven-verse count that expressly includes the basmala."}, {"id": "1:2/q15/p3", "position": "The basmala is outside the verse count.", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The report begins God's response when the servant says “Praise belongs to God,” which indicates the basmala is not part of al-Fatiha; if it is outside al-Fatiha, consensus excludes it from other surahs too. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The decisive sixth proof is Medina's continuous practice: across generations, its mosque did not recite the basmala aloud in congregational prayers, making the practice mutawatir evidence that it is not part of the sura."}, {"id": "1:2/q15/p4", "position": "The sūra was revealed in Medina.", "reasons": "DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عائشة): During a drought prayer, the Prophet invoked God as Lord of the worlds, the Merciful, and Master of Judgment, asking for rain that would sustain them; Abu Dawud calls the report rare with a good chain, and says it supports the Medinan no-alif reading. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars reject a Medinan origin because Muslims needed the sūrah to perform obligatory prayers."}, {"id": "1:2/q15/p5", "position": "The sūra has eight verses.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الحسن البصري): Hasan al-Basri counts the sura as eight verses."}, {"id": "1:2/q15/p6", "position": "The sūra has six verses.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الحسين الجعفي): Al-Husayn al-Ju'fi counts it as six verses; an unspecified view counts nine, which requires excluding the basmala, while counting it in seven merges two verses."}]}
{"id": "1:2/q16", "question": "Why is the Fātiḥa given its names?", "turns_on": "The titles are explained by different functions and contents of the sūra.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q16/p1", "position": "It is the Opening of the Book and prayer.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (سيبويه): The lām normally has fatḥa because it cannot begin with sukun; lām of possession and emphasis are distinguished, and attached pronouns restore its original opening vowel. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Rabb means owner; for a created being the title is used only in a construct phrase such as owner of the house or servant. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أهل النظر): The derivation of ʿālam from ʿalāma, “sign,” supports the speculative theologians' view: the world is named as a sign pointing to its Creator. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Saba’s statement that everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God is another subset within the universal lordship named in the Fātiḥa. | mentions 34:1 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Only God is necessary in Himself; everything else is possible and is called the world because its existence points to God. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The opening glorification reveals the lights of divine majesty and moves from declaring God's transcendence to praising Him. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rabb may derive from nurture: God manages and raises creation; stepdaughters are called rabāʾib because a husband raises them, making Rabb an attribute of action, while owner or master is an attribute of essence. | mentions 4:23 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): With the definite article, Rabb belongs exclusively to God; without it, people may be called a household’s lord. God alone creates and provides, owns both owners and owned things, and cannot lose His dominion. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الهروي): Rabb also means one who repairs, manages, restores, or takes care of something; rabbani scholars are named for tending to scripture. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): Al-‘alamin may mean everything the Creator knows of bodies, substances, and accidents, or every existing thing besides God, named for being evidence of His existence. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): Rabb may be a verbal noun used adjectivally or an active participle with deleted alif; as a title it is exclusive to God, while others require a possessive complement. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (author): The lām can express possession, transfer of ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, exclamation, specification, result, location, endpoint, and superiority; Qur'anic and Arabic examples illustrate these functions. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 7:57, 17:107 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The lām in lillāh has numerous possible relations, including ownership, entitlement, relation, cause, communication, specification, outcome, time, endpoint, and elevation. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām in li-llah expresses entitlement here; other senses include ownership, transfer, kinship, cause, address, oath exclamation, clarification, result, location, endpoint, elevation, and augmentation. | mentions 16:72, 4:105, 12:23, 28:8, 21:47, 17:78, 35:13, 17:109, 12:43, 11:107, 43:29, 16:1, 27:72, 8:9 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): The unqualified title al-Rabb is used only for God; for other possessors it must be annexed, and some say al-Rabb is the greatest name. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A Prophetic report says he was sent to complete noble character; the author links this completion with the Fatiha's comprehensive opening and the Qur'an's culmination. | mentions 5:3 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The cow story makes the surah's title apt because resurrection occurs through an apparently slight human cause; it is a clearer sign of divine power than Abraham's story or earlier Israelite resurrections. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Al-Baqara is also called the Radiant and the Hump: it illuminates guidance and sufficiency, brightens believers' faces at judgment, and exalts belief in the afterlife above every other good after monotheism. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): By signaling all Qur’anic aims, the Fatiha achieves an exemplary opening and combines beautiful words, pleasing cadence, and rhetorical forms. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): It is called the Treasure surah because a report says the Opening is a treasure from God's Throne. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): The opening of al-Fātiḥa is also the final wording of the supplications in 10:10, giving the sūra a return-to-the-beginning frame. | mentions 10:10 ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Opening the sūra’s descriptions with Rabb al-ʿālamīn suits the Prophet’s mission and asks for compassion toward all creatures, since God is their Lord. ALUSI, d. 1270 (ابن حلزة): Ibn Ḥilaza’s poem calls al-Mundhir rabb, an unusual unqualified application of the title to a human being. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (السعد): Al-Ālūsī says treating You alone we worship as an explanation rests on the missing conjunction, but that reverses the proper relation between the opening and its continuation. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Another debate asks whether al-ʿālamīn is a regular plural, a collective noun, or a name for a totality; al-Ālūsī concludes it is a true plural because each member is itself called an ʿālam. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The plural al-ʿālamīn guarantees inclusion of every created kind: a singular definite noun could be heard as the familiar perceptible world, whereas the plural distributes lordship across all named kinds and their individuals. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Opening the Fatiha's descriptions with Lord of the worlds suits the Prophet's mission as a profound act of nurturing humanity and hints at compassion for all people. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The opening three verses speak about God in the unseen; reflection makes God present to the worshipper, who can then turn to direct address and pledge worship and need. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The world is the collection of all things other than God that point to Him through causal relations; any part possessing an ordered relation can be called a realm. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Every ordered community of things, from inner awareness to external objects, is named a realm because it serves as a sign and means of knowing God’s creation, lordship, and perfection. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A good opening hints at its subject, preparing receptive hearers and allowing advanced hearers to assess or complete the argument; this displays the speaker's command of it. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Arabs do not appear to have used definite singular al-ilah for an idol: they used a possessive construction, another title, or the plural alihah. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (الزجاج ونسب إلى الخليل وسيبويه): Another group says the name was coined directly for God without derivation from alaha; one rationale is that Arabs named everything and would not leave God unnamed. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (الحارث بن حلزة): Al-Harith ibn Hilliza calls Amr ibn Hind al-rabb in a poem, evidence that Arabs applied the title to a human ruler. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (غاوي بن ظالم أو عباس بن مرداس): A pre-Islamic poet applies rabb to an idol, ridiculing a deity with a fox urinating on its head; al-Uzza was also called al-Rabba and the plural is ارباب. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He reads the su
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
