<<chunk 34, part 4 of 0..4>>
tlement across all attributes. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Other opening praises name God as creator, originator, owner of all things, or sender of scripture; each fits its surah and the openings complement one another. | mentions 6:1, 35:1, 34:1, 18:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The next four opening praise formulas describe particular aspects contained in al-Fatiha's general Rabb al-alamin. | mentions 6:1, 18:1, 34:1, 35:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The opening attributes span all time: praise before creation, at creation, through continuing mercy, and through the unending recompense of the afterlife, as 28:70 says. | mentions 28:70 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): الحمد لله also declares praise to be God's rightful property because of His abundant favors; a personal act of praising does not assert this entitlement. STUDYQURAN (author): God praises Himself in the opening so humans can praise Him in divine speech, which He knows is more adequate than their own words. ʿAlī calls the seven oft-repeated al-Ḥamd, identifying the sūra by its opening praise."}, {"id": "1:2/q16/p3", "position": "It is the Mother of the Qurʾān because it gathers its aims.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): It is called the Mother of the Qur’an because its verses encompass the Qur’an’s four central aims: theology, resurrection, prophethood, and divine decree. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A second reason for calling it the Mother of the Book is that all revelation comprises praise, worshipful service, and requests for unveiling; the sura includes each in that order. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): As the Mother of the Qur’an, the Fātiḥa is the source from which other suras branch; every being besides God is evidence of His divinity. QURTUBI, d. 671 (author): One derivation traces Rabb to tarbiya, since God manages and nurtures creation; the stepdaughter is called rabība because her mother’s husband raises her. In this sense it is an attribute of action, while owner or master denotes an attribute of essence. | mentions 4:23 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): A surah's name summarizes its purpose, as a title signals the details within; Adam demonstrated this naming principle when he named things before the angels. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The Fatiha's many titles converge on مراقبة: it is the Mother of the Book, foundation, oft-repeated, treasure, healing, sufficing, complete, protecting, incantation, praise, thanks, supplication and prayer. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the Qur'an's sevenfold gathering in Muhammad's heart relates to the Mother of Qur'an's universals as the Qur'an's gathering in his heart relates to the Mother. ITQAN, d. 911 (الإمام فخر الدين): Fakhr al-Din maps the Qur’an’s four aims—God, resurrection, prophethood, and divine decree—onto the Fatiha: praise, Judgment Day, worship and reliance, and guidance through the surah’s end; this supports its name Umm al-Qur’an. | mentions 1:2, 1:4, 1:6, 1:7 ITQAN, d. 911 (علي): Ali said, as transmitted by Ibn Abi Jamra, that he could load seventy camels with commentary on the Umm al-Qur’an; the source explains the remark by showing how much each phrase requires. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Fatiha is the Mother of the Qur'an because it gathers the Qur'an's purposes: affirming divinity and prophethood, and establishing decree and predestination. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The surah's preparation rejects atheism and materialism, polytheism, stubbornness, and errors corrupting sound knowledge or true law; this is why it is called the Mother of the Quran. | mentions 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The names Umm al-Qur'an and Umm al-Kitab are established in the Sunna; “mother” denotes a thing's origin and source. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو سعيد الخدري): A report in Sahih al-Bukhari says Abu Sa'id al-Khudri recited Umm al-Qur'an over a person suffering from a sting as a healing prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sound hadith calls a prayer without Umm al-Qur'an deficient. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): One explanation of Umm al-Qur'an is that it begins and opens the Qur'an, making it like its origin. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): A third explanation of Umm al-Qur'an is that it contains the Qur'an's theoretical wisdom and practical rulings, including theology, prophecy, admonition, worship, transactions, morals, and law. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): These aims help explain why al-Fatiha is called Umm al-Qur'an. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The praise covers time from eternity to eternity, echoed by praise in the first and last life and at the end of judgment; this fullness makes al-Fatiha worthy to be the Mother of the Book. | mentions 28:70, 39:75, 10:10 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The surah is truly the Mother of the Book because it contains both doctrinal foundations and the two pillars of action. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Al-Fatiha contains faith and good works, affirming God, the Last Day, angels, messengers, and scriptures, and joins lordship's unity to the unity of worship; it is therefore the Mother of the Book. STUDYQURAN (author): The sūrah is seen as a synthesis and the Quran’s most important chapter, hence Umm al-kitāb; the title also refers to 3:7 and the celestial archetype of scripture. | mentions 3:7, 13:39, 43:4 STUDYQURAN (author): It is called the Mother of the Quran because it contains the meaning of the entire Quran. Abū Hurayra reports the Prophet calling ‘Praise belongs to God, Lord of the worlds’ the Mother of the Qurʾan and the Mother of the Book; another report from Abū Hurayra includes Mother of the Qurʾan among the Fātiḥa’s titles."}, {"id": "1:2/q16/p4", "position": "It is named for its role in prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Many names indicate the honor of the named; Fātiḥat al-Kitāb is so called because it opens codices, teaching, recitation, and prayer, or because praise opens speech, or because it was the first sura sent down. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The prophetic statement “no prayer without the Opening of the Book” directly supports the requirement. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (رسول الله [ ص ]): The Prophet says prayer is invalid without reciting the Opening of the Book; the report is in both Sahih collections. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Fātiḥah means The Opening: it opens the Book, each prayer cycle, many everyday acts, and may open the breast to faith."}, {"id": "1:2/q16/p5", "position": "It is the Seven Oft-Repeated through its verses and repeated recitation.", "reasons": "BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): It is called the seven oft-repeated because it has seven verses, each can stand for seven Qur'anic portions, and reciting them is said to earn the whole Qur'an's reward or close seven gates of Hell. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The name al-mathani is explained by repetition in prayer or each rak'a, intercession in each rak'a, or revelation twice, in Mecca and Medina. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report in Sahih al-Bukhari from Abu Sa'id ibn al-Mu'alla says the Prophet identified al-Hamdu lillah as the seven oft-repeated verses and the great Qur'an given to him. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): On this reading, mathani in al-Fatiha resembles the repeated narratives and themes in the Qur'an called mathani in al-Zumar. | mentions 39:23 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Mathani is a plural of muthanna, with alternative vocalized or lightened forms; al-Jurjani notes that each can also be feminine. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): A further view takes mathani to mean repeated in prayer, citing Arabic use of the dual for repeated action. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): The Prophet identifies the Fātiḥah as the greatest sūrah, calling it Praise be to God and the seven oft-repeated, and linking it to 15:87. | mentions 15:87 STUDYQURAN (author): Another title, The Seven Oft-Repeated, is linked to 15:87. | mentions 15:87 Abū Hurayra reports the Prophet calling the opening praise the seven oft-repeated; ʿAlī identifies them as al-Ḥamd and counts the basmala to make seven; another report from Abū Hurayra gives the title alongside a seven-verse count that includes the basmala."}, {"id": "1:2/q16/p6", "position": "It is named for healing.", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN (author): The title The Cure reflects its reputed healing power for body and soul."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
