<<chunk 34, part 1 of 0..4>>
esty and moves from declaring God's transcendence to praising Him. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): A further view takes it here to mean people: each person contains counterparts of the cosmos that reveal the Creator, as in the verse about looking within oneself. | mentions 51:21 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The passage names al-Baqara 2:281 as the last revealed verse and says its recitation position between the debt verse and the verse before it shows revelation and recitation order can differ. | mentions 2:281, 75:17 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): It is called the seven oft-repeated because it has seven verses, each can stand for seven Qur'anic portions, and reciting them is said to earn the whole Qur'an's reward or close seven gates of Hell. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Human beings are described as a synthesis and miniature of the cosmos; reflection on oneself and the earth reveals signs of the Creator. | mentions 51:20, 51:21 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): ʿĀlam originally means a means of knowing, then came to denote what reveals the Creator: all that exists besides Him, substances and accidents, either as the whole or as each kind. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Humanity is a concentrated summary of created things, and reflection on the self reveals the Creator's greatness; the apt reading here remains universal. | mentions 51:20, 51:21 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi says deriving the duty of gratitude from God's own revealed declaration only proves it through revelation, so it cannot establish a pre-revelation rational duty. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Nurturing is gradual movement toward perfection, visibly at work throughout the universe; contemplating the realms reveals the law of divine nurturing, while the realms themselves are known through their relation to God. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Without God’s perfect lordship and nurturing, neither existence nor development could be real; the world’s real share in these qualities reveals God as Lord of all realms. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Al-Fatiha is Meccan and has seven verses; Muslims recite it at least seventeen times daily, more with voluntary prayers, and may repeat it without limit. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Comparing Islam's simple, coherent account of God with the inherited tangle of beliefs reveals this creed as mercy for heart and mind. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The claim that al-Fatiha was named for being revealed once in Mecca and again in Medina is very remote: repetition of revelation is not accepted, and the sura is agreed to be Meccan. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The sura has seven verses by agreement among reciters and commentators, with a few dissenting counts. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Praise precedes God's name because this occasion is the beginning of Qur'anic revelation, the great blessing that brings success in both worlds and evokes the Revealer's beautiful attributes. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): The doxology was already used in the early Meccan period; in middle Meccan texts it is joined to the epithet rabb al-ʿālamīn, itself attested early. | mentions 52:48, 37:182, 39:75, 83:6, 81:27, 81:29, 69:43, 68:52, 56:80 CORPUSCORANICUM (author): This theological lexicon recasts the negatively charged early Meccan human as homo eschatologicus, belonging to both worlds under God’s rule. | mentions 103:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): These openings jointly describe God as originator, shaper, owner, sustainer, and guide through revealed books; Rabb al-alamin encompasses all these qualities and worlds. | mentions 6:1, 18:1, 34:1, 35:1 STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars place al-Fātiḥah among the earliest sūrahs revealed in Makkah. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): A report says nothing like the Fātiḥah was revealed in the Torah, Psalms, Gospel, or Quran. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): One attribution says Satan was frightened when the Fātiḥah was revealed, among four events; others attribute the saying to the Prophet. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): Mujāhid says al-Fātiḥah was revealed in Madinah. THALABI: Reports include twice revelation in Mecca and Medina, healing from poison, averting punishment by children's recitation, and the sūra's comprehensive knowledge. THALABI: Reports include twice revelation in Mecca and Medina, healing from poison, averting punishment by children's recitation, and the sūra's comprehensive knowledge. THALABI: Reports include twice revelation in Mecca and Medina, healing from poison, averting punishment by children's recitation, and the sūra's comprehensive knowledge. THALABI: Reports include twice revelation in Mecca and Medina, healing from poison, averting punishment by children's recitation, and the sūra's comprehensive knowledge. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wāḥidī reports an early Meccan origin, the call heard after Waraqa's advice, ʿAlī's Throne-treasure report, Quraysh's response, Mujāhid's Medinan dissent, and 15:87 as evidence. BAGHAWI-FULL: All agree on seven, but the basmala changes where the final verse begins."}, {"id": "1:2/q15/p2", "position": "The basmala is included in the verse count.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أم سلمة عن النبي): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet recited al-Fatiha while counting the basmala as its first verse, followed by the rest of its verses. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو هريرة عن النبي): In the divided-prayer report, God calls the basmala glorification, al-Hamd praise, the two mercy names extolling, the Master of Judgment entrustment, and the remaining response a sharing and a request granted. BIQAI, d. 885 (author): Because the basmala is a kind of praise, it is naturally followed by the comprehensive name al-ḥamd; this implicitly calls people to praise God as the one deserving every praise. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): The basmala relates to the Fatiha as the Fatiha relates to the Qur'an: each is a compact synthesis of what the larger whole details. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Since the basmala is a kind of praise, it naturally leads to comprehensive al-hamd: begin affairs by praising God as the one deserving every praise, with hope and awe guiding the way. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أم سلمة): Aisha reports that the Prophet counted the basmala as verse one, al-hamd as two, al-Rahman al-Rahim as three, Malik yawm al-din as four, then indicated five for the next verse. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Because the book opens with the basmala, a kind of praise, God follows it with comprehensive praise at the highest degree of perfection. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The relation between the basmala and Fatiha unfolds the primordial covenant between the eternal Lord and c reation, inscribing a relation already present in human nature. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The basmala is the crown, the Qur’an a perfect body, Fatiha its head, and alhamdu lillah its face; mercy, guidance, worship, and divine unity express its spiritual life. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The basmala names God and His attributes while leaving humanity implicit; saying it establishes the divine relation that lets al-Fatiha bring humans forth with gratitude into speech. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The hidden humanity of the basmala becomes a speaking subject in al-Fatiha, while God is present as interlocutor; the surah captures the full relation of life and existence. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Contextual relation may be backward or forward; if the basmala is part of al-Fatiha, backward context is irrelevant, while its relation to 96:1 belongs to revelation order and forward context. | mentions 96:1 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Nothing lies outside the basmala's attraction, so it relates generally to al-Fatiha as one recites, writes, praises, or begins the Quran in its name. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Specifically, basmala and al-Fatiha are closely linked by cadence, wording, summary and explanation; al-Fatiha's gratitude answers the basmala's attraction of mercy. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Their structures correspond: the basmala has seven actual or implicit words, four independent words and three divine-name words; al-Fatiha has seven verses, four statements, and three complete pauses, with the middle tawhid verse linking two three-verse units. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The verse division differs by region: Medinans exclude the basmala and count “those You favored” as a verse; Meccans and Kufans include the basmala and combine that phrase with its verse; Hasan counts both separately. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur says sound Sunna contains no evidence that the basmala is a verse at the beginnings of Qur'anic suras, and presents six proofs. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو هريرة): The first proof is Malik's report from Abu Hurayra: God's division of prayer begins with al-Hamdu lillah, without mentioning the basmala; prayer here means recitation in prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبي بن كعب): In the second proof, Ubayy ibn Ka'b recites the celebrated sura from al-Hamdu lillah to its end when asked how he opens prayer, without reciting the basmala. IBNASHUR-FULL,
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
