<<chunk 35, part 1 of 0..5>>
ons 2:281, 75:17 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Recitation order can differ from revelation chronology; the verse allowing the Prophet to marry certain women was placed before a later restriction. | mentions 33:50, 33:52 DURR, d. 911 (رسول الله): The Prophet says purification is half of faith and al-hamd fills the balance; other phrases fill the space between heaven and earth, while prayer, charity, patience, and the Quran serve as signs or testimony. DURR, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عمرو بن العاص): Ibn ʿAmr assigns distinct functions to remembrances: glorification is creation's prayer, al-hamd gratitude, tawhid sincerity, takbir fills heaven and earth, and the declaration of God's powerlessness-to-act-without-help brings God's command to submit. DURR, d. 911 (أبو عبد الرحمن الجبائي): Abu ʿAbd al-Rahman al-Jubbaʾi says prayer, fasting, and every good deed done for God count as gratitude, with al-hamd the best gratitude. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو عبد الرحمن الجبائي): Abu Abd al-Rahman al-Jubba'i says prayer, fasting, and every good deed for God are gratitude, with al-hamd the best form. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عمرو بن العاص): Abd Allah ibn Amr assigns distinct meanings to the formulas: tasbih is the creatures' prayer, al-hamd is gratitude, tahlil is sincerity, takbir fills heaven and earth, and “no power” expresses surrender. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عائشة): During a drought prayer, the Prophet invoked God as Lord of the worlds, the Merciful, and Master of Judgment, asking for rain that would sustain them; Abu Dawud calls the report rare with a good chain, and says it supports the Medinan no-alif reading. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The name al-mathani is explained by repetition in prayer or each rak'a, intercession in each rak'a, or revelation twice, in Mecca and Medina. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Other names include the Prayer, Healing, Cure, Foundation, Sufficient, Complete, Praise, Supplication, Thanks, and Invocation surahs because their meanings occur in it. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The surah is Fatiha because it opens the codex, instruction, Qur'an recitation, prayer, speech, revelation, the aims of this life, and the gates of Paradise. ALUSI, d. 1270 (النواس بن سمعان): Al-Ṭabarānī reports from al-Nawwās b. Samʿān that the Prophet vowed to thank God if his she-camel returned; when it did, he said al-ḥamdu lillāh, and the Companions expected further prayer or fasting. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الغزالي): Al-Ghazālī interprets the congregational prayer report as the worshippers speaking collectively in the first-person plural. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The phrase opens the Fātiḥa and also closes the final supplications, as in the verse describing the last prayer of Paradise’s inhabitants. | mentions 10:10 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (النواس بن سمعان): Al-Ṭabarānī reports that after the Prophet’s she-camel was stolen, he vowed to thank God if it returned; when it did, he said alhamdulillah, and the Companions awaited fasting or prayer, showing they understood gratitude as action. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الغزالي): Al-Ghazālī applies the plural-language explanation to the report that congregational prayer exceeds an individual prayer by twenty-seven degrees. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ساداتنا الصوفية): Sufi masters say the appropriate divine name in prayer changes with the seeker's spiritual state and whether the experience is one of differentiation or union. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The descriptions close by pointing to resurrection, just as Lord of the worlds opened with origination; they explain the prior praise and prepare for the prayer that follows. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): Al-Fatiha is Meccan and has seven verses; Muslims recite it at least seventeen times daily, more with voluntary prayers, and may repeat it without limit. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (رسول الله [ ص ]): The Prophet says prayer is invalid without reciting the Opening of the Book; the report is in both Sahih collections. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (رسول الله): Abu Hurayra reports in Sahih Muslim that God calls al-Fatiha a prayer divided between Himself and His servant: praise, mercy, and glorification are the Lord's; worship and aid are shared; guidance and the servant's request belong to the servant, who receives what he asks. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The prayer teaches believers to val ue blessings properly by thanking their giver, praising the giver of reason and success. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو سعيد الخدري): A report in Sahih al-Bukhari says Abu Sa'id al-Khudri recited Umm al-Qur'an over a person suffering from a sting as a healing prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sound hadith calls a prayer without Umm al-Qur'an deficient. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Requiring al-Fatiha in every rak'ah preserves recollection of the Qur'an's purposes contained within it. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-Kashshaf explains the name as referring to verses repeated in each rak'ah; this is also said to be transmitted from Umar. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur accepts the explanation tied to each rak'ah because al-Fatiha is joined to another sura in every rak'ah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Another account connects the name to the early form of prayer: prayers were first prescribed as two rak'ahs, travel prayer remained so, and residence prayer was lengthened; an opposite account is also mentioned. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): A further view takes mathani to mean repeated in prayer, citing Arabic use of the dual for repeated action. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A hadith in both Sahihs from Abu Hurayra has God divide prayer between Himself and the servant, answering each portion of al-Fatiha and granting the servant's request. | mentions 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو هريرة): The first proof is Malik's report from Abu Hurayra: God's division of prayer begins with al-Hamdu lillah, without mentioning the basmala; prayer here means recitation in prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبي بن كعب): In the second proof, Ubayy ibn Ka'b recites the celebrated sura from al-Hamdu lillah to its end when asked how he opens prayer, without reciting the basmala. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports in Muslim and other collections that the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar began recitation with al-Hamdu lillah and did not mention the basmala at either end. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (عائشة): Aisha reports that the Prophet opened prayer with the takbir and began recitation with al-Hamdu lillah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The decisive sixth proof is Medina's continuous practice: across generations, its mosque did not recite the basmala aloud in congregational prayers, making the practice mutawatir evidence that it is not part of the sura. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The verse puts الحمد before لله because praise for revelation and Islam frames the opening recitation; contextual importance can precede God's intrinsic priority, while praising Him still attends to His affairs. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The author favors the exhaustive sense, supported by the Prophetic prayer اللهم لك الحمد كله: all known praise belongs to God without exception. STUDYQURAN (author): As Sūrat al-Ḥamd and Sūrat al-Ṣalāh, the Fātiḥah begins each prayer cycle for Sunnis and many Shiites. STUDYQURAN (God): In a hadith qudsī, God responds to the servant’s praise, magnification, and glorification during the prayer, which is divided between them. STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah is a prayer encapsulating metaphysical and eschatological realities and teaches the proper human disposition toward God. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars reject a Medinan origin because Muslims needed the sūrah to perform obligatory prayers. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Fātiḥah means The Opening: it opens the Book, each prayer cycle, many everyday acts, and may open the breast to faith. Al-Rāzī argues that 73:20 requires the Fātiḥa: another sūra is not universally required and the Fātiḥa is agreed to be better and more complete."}, {"id": "1:2/q17/p2", "position": "The Fātiḥa is not required in prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Most scholars require recitation in prayer, while al-Asamm and al-Hasan b. Salih deny that recitation is obligatory. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Shafi'i and most scholars require al-Fatiha itself; omitting even one letter knowingly invalidates prayer, whereas Abu Hanifa says it is not required. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Against the objection that the negation in no prayer except with al-Fatiha must mean incompleteness rather than invalidity, Razi cites a version explicitly denying prayer's occurrence for one who omits it. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If prayers with and without al-Fatiha were both valid, habitual recitation would make other surahs abandoned; because the community agrees al-Fatiha is preferable, Razi concludes omission is invalid. QUTB-ZILAL, d. 1386 (author): The short surah gathers core Islamic creed, worldview, feelings, and guidance, explaining its repetition in every rakʿa and why prayer without it is invalid."}]}
{"id": "1:2/q18", "question": "How does this verse relate to the sūra and other Qurʾanic passages?", "turns_on": "The sources connect the opening with guidance, subsequent divine names, or other praise openings.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q18/p1", "position": "The sūra moves from praise to worship and petition.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Many names indicate the honor of the named; Fātiḥat al-Kitāb is so called because it opens codices, teaching, recitation, and prayer, or because praise opens speech, or because it was the first sura sent down. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): It is called Sūrat al-Ḥamd because its opening word is praise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): As the Mother of the Qur’an, the Fātiḥa is the source from which other suras branch; every being besides God is evidence of His divinity. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Shafi'i and most scholar
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
