<<chunk 35, part 4 of 0..5>>
ntary prayers, and may repeat it without limit. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): Al-Fatiha serves as the Quran's proem or a sermon introduction; this literary arrangement aids understanding and attentive reception. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): A preface should be concise so listeners are not tired by waiting; the shortness of Al-Fatiha explains its placement before the longer surahs. IBNASHUR, d. 1393 (author): The surah's preparation rejects atheism and materialism, polytheism, stubbornness, and errors corrupting sound knowledge or true law; this is why it is called the Mother of the Quran. | mentions 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The surah begins with praise so the second half of the Qur'an opens with الحمد لله, echoing the opening of the first half in al-Fātiḥa and the approximate start of the fourth quarter in Q 35:1. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): He reads the sura's annexation to Fatihat al-Kitab as descriptive: it means a sura characterized as the Book's opening, with no separate title needed. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): By contrast, Fatihat al-Kitab is a true annexation: al-Kitab here means the remainder of the Book apart from the sura called the Opening. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Requiring al-Fatiha in every rak'ah preserves recollection of the Qur'an's purposes contained within it. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): On this reading, mathani in al-Fatiha resembles the repeated narratives and themes in the Qur'an called mathani in al-Zumar. | mentions 39:23 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The claim that al-Fatiha was named for being revealed once in Mecca and again in Medina is very remote: repetition of revelation is not accepted, and the sura is agreed to be Meccan. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur accepts the explanation tied to each rak'ah because al-Fatiha is joined to another sura in every rak'ah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A hadith in both Sahihs from Abu Hurayra has God divide prayer between Himself and the servant, answering each portion of al-Fatiha and granting the servant's request. | mentions 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, 1:5, 1:6, 1:7 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): As a Qur'anic preface, al-Fatiha models an Arabic literary opening that improves understanding and attentive reception. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Al-Fatiha models four rules for introductions: keep them brief, foreshadow the subject, use concise comprehensive wording, and begin with praise of God. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): These aims help explain why al-Fatiha is called Umm al-Qur'an. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (النبي): The Prophet transmits God's division of al-Fatiha between Himself and the servant: each phrase receives divine acknowledgement and a tailored promise of blessing, mercy, ease of judgment, reward, help, and fulfillment of the servant's requests. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (بعض النصارى): He also quotes a Christian's parody of al-Fatiha as another failed counter-imitation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The author opens the book with al-Fatiha for blessing. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The differing formulations of Rabb al-alamin and Lord of heaven, earth, and worlds each fit the focus of their surah. | mentions 45:36 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Other opening praises name God as creator, originator, owner of all things, or sender of scripture; each fits its surah and the openings complement one another. | mentions 6:1, 35:1, 34:1, 18:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The next four opening praise formulas describe particular aspects contained in al-Fatiha's general Rabb al-alamin. | mentions 6:1, 18:1, 34:1, 35:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Al-Anam's creation of heaven and earth, darkness, and light is one part of the wider lordship over all worlds in al-Fatiha. | mentions 6:1 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The praise covers time from eternity to eternity, echoed by praise in the first and last life and at the end of judgment; this fullness makes al-Fatiha worthy to be the Mother of the Book. | mentions 28:70, 39:75, 10:10 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The surah gathers the foundations of Islamic belief: God and His perfect attributes, monotheism, the Last Day, divine power, and the messengers and revelation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The surah is truly the Mother of the Book because it contains both doctrinal foundations and the two pillars of action. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Fronting لله in لله الحمد normally marks restriction, but al-Fatiha's context is not one of exclusive praise: worldly praise can also be directed to people, unlike exclusive worship. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Al-Fatiha contains faith and good works, affirming God, the Last Day, angels, messengers, and scriptures, and joins lordship's unity to the unity of worship; it is therefore the Mother of the Book. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars place al-Fātiḥah among the earliest sūrahs revealed in Makkah. STUDYQURAN (author): As Sūrat al-Ḥamd and Sūrat al-Ṣalāh, the Fātiḥah begins each prayer cycle for Sunnis and many Shiites. STUDYQURAN (author): Shiite law permits reciting the Fātiḥah in the third and fourth cycles or an alternative formula praising God. STUDYQURAN (author): Muslims recite the Fātiḥah at diverse life events; funeral services are called fātiḥah in some lands as an opening from one life to another. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): The Prophet identifies the Fātiḥah as the greatest sūrah, calling it Praise be to God and the seven oft-repeated, and linking it to 15:87. | mentions 15:87 STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah is a prayer encapsulating metaphysical and eschatological realities and teaches the proper human disposition toward God. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): A report says nothing like the Fātiḥah was revealed in the Torah, Psalms, Gospel, or Quran. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): One attribution says Satan was frightened when the Fātiḥah was revealed, among four events; others attribute the saying to the Prophet. STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah’s exalted status generated many independent commentaries, often showing how the Quran as a whole is contained in it. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): Mujāhid says al-Fātiḥah was revealed in Madinah. STUDYQURAN (ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib): A saying attributed to ʿAlī compresses the Quran into the Fātiḥah, the basmalah, its opening bāʾ, and the diacritical point beneath it. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars reject a Medinan origin because Muslims needed the sūrah to perform obligatory prayers. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Fātiḥah means The Opening: it opens the Book, each prayer cycle, many everyday acts, and may open the breast to faith. STUDYQURAN (author): The sūrah is seen as a synthesis and the Quran’s most important chapter, hence Umm al-kitāb; the title also refers to 3:7 and the celestial archetype of scripture. | mentions 3:7, 13:39, 43:4 STUDYQURAN (author): The title The Foundation reflects the Fātiḥah’s role as a foundation for the whole Quran. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB: Al-Ṭabarī answers critics of repetition: the Qurʾān gathers prior scriptural modes with inimitable composition; the Fātiḥa's praise, blessing, request and warning guide people to thank God and reject rivals. TAB-FULL: Some interpreters take the mercy names as advanced in sense before Rabb, explaining the order. JISHUMI: The mercy names and their repetition are explained as worship, aid, praise or emphasis. JISHUMI: The mercy names and their repetition are explained as worship, aid, praise or emphasis. JISHUMI: The mercy names and their repetition are explained as worship, aid, praise or emphasis."}, {"id": "1:2/q18/p2", "position": "The opening praise prepares the request for guidance.", "reasons": "RAZI, d. 606 (author): Razi sketches the sūra’s sequence: seek refuge from sins, begin good works in God’s name, praise and recognize his lordship and mercy, heed judgment, worship and seek help, ask guidance, and avoid ignorance and error. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The seven Fatiha verses remove seven vices: praise dispels desire, Lord of the worlds greed, Judgment Day anger, worship and aid pride and vanity, guidance caprice, the favored path unbelief and doubt, and the final phrase innovation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الله تعالى): In a divine report transmitted by the Prophet, God responds to each Fatiha phrase: the opening remembers Him, praise praises Him, the mercy names magnify Him, Judgment Day glorifies Him or is entrusted to Him, worship belongs to Him, aid relies on Him, and guidance is the servant's request. NASAFI, d. 710 (أبو هريرة عن النبي): Abu Hurayra reports God’s dialogue dividing the Fatiha between Himself and the servant: praise, glorification, and exaltation belong to God; the worshipper’s request for guidance and the response to it belong to the s
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
