<<chunk 35, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:2/q17", "question": "Must the Fātiḥa be recited in prayer?", "turns_on": "The jurists differ over whether this particular sūra is necessary for valid prayer.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q17/p1", "position": "The Fātiḥa is required in prayer.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (زيد بن علي): Zayd ibn Ali's fatḥa on the bā of rabb is understood as demonstrating that the form is possible, not as a recitation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Many names indicate the honor of the named; Fātiḥat al-Kitāb is so called because it opens codices, teaching, recitation, and prayer, or because praise opens speech, or because it was the first sura sent down. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The command to perform the dawn recitation in Quran 17:78 is a command to read and therefore makes recitation obligatory. | mentions 17:78 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو الدرداء عن النبي): A man asked the Prophet whether prayer includes recitation; when the man concluded that it was obligatory, the Prophet approved him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن مسعود عن النبي): In another report, the Prophet answers a question about reciting in prayer by asking whether there can be prayer without recitation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الأصم): Al-Asamm argues that the Prophet described prayer as things seen, whereas recitation is not visible and must therefore fall outside prayer; Razi answers that seeing with two objects means knowing. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The prayer's two halves arise through the verses of al-Fatiha; since prayer entails this division and it entails this surah, al-Fatiha is necessary for valid prayer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If al-Fatiha is a constituent of prayer, omitting it means the prayer's very essence does not exist, so the hadith's negation can remain literal. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Because the established form of the Prophet's prayer included al-Fatiha, the command to establish prayer requires it; the command recurs over a hundred times in the Quran. | mentions 2:43 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The rightly guided caliphs consistently recited al-Fatiha; reports in both Sahihs say the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Umar began recitation with al-Hamd, so their practice should be followed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Muslims everywhere recite al-Fatiha in prayer; even if some regard it as recommended rather than obligatory, abandoning the unanimous practice leaves the believers' path and incurs Quran 4:115's warning. | mentions 4:115 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Prophet identifies al-Fatiha as a surah unmatched in the Torah, Gospel, or Psalms; the Companions' answer about what they recite in prayer indicates a known universal practice. [RAZI-FULL:v1p158#2/ r2] RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author | holds | Razi argues that Quran 73:20 requires al-Fatiha: the options are al-Fatiha, another surah, or a choice; the latter two fail because another is not universally required and al-Fatiha is agreed better and more complete. | mentions 73:20 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Fatiha is the recitation made accessible to all because every Muslim has it memorized, whereas other surahs may not be memorized by each person. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The original duty to pray remains until evidence shows discharge; al-Fatiha is superior and makes prayer more complete, so omitting it does not establish discharge. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو هريرة عن النبي): The Prophet says a prayer without al-Fatiha is deficient and incomplete; Razi argues that a deficient performance does not discharge the continuing obligation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi compares Abu Hanifa's ruling that an Eid fast cannot make up Ramadan because it is incomplete and asks why the same reasoning does not invalidate prayer without al-Fatiha. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن المنذر عن أبي هريرة عن النبي): Ibn al-Mundhir transmits from Abu Huraira that the Prophet said a prayer without al-Fatiha does not suffice. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (رفاعة بن مالك عن النبي): A man who asks the Prophet to teach him prayer is told to face the qibla, say takbir, and recite al-Fatiha; Razi treats this imperative as obligation and recitation as part of prayer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Although belief in obligation may itself leave theoretical doubt, actual recitation creates no danger while omission creates fear of failing the duty; therefore action is the safer course. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Since the Prophet recited al-Fatiha throughout his life, replacing it with another recitation is innovation and abandonment of the required prophetic example. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer without al-Fatiha loses an agreed extra virtue without compensation, which Razi regards as improper and therefore impermissible. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو هريرة عن النبي): Abu Huraira reports that the Prophet ordered him to announce that there is no prayer without recitation, even if by al-Fatiha. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi counters the opposing report with Abu Huraira's version no prayer except by al-Fatiha; if reports conflict, the stronger and safer view is his. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi reports disagreement over the minimum recitation for Hanafis: Abu Hanifa accepts one verse, even isolated letters, while Abu Yusuf and Muhammad require three short verses or one long verse. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو هريرة عن النبي): In the divided-prayer report, God calls the basmala glorification, al-Hamd praise, the two mercy names extolling, the Master of Judgment entrustment, and the remaining response a sharing and a request granted. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi supports obligatory Fatiha recitation because the Prophet consistently recited it and commands require following him. | mentions 6:153 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The transmitted report itself says that prayer is not established without the Fatiha. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Muslims everywhere recite it in prayer, and the Qur'an commands following the path of believers. | mentions 4:115 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The prophetic statement “no prayer without the Opening of the Book” directly supports the requirement. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The command to recite what is easy from the Qur'an is obligatory; because reciting other passages is not, the obligatory recitation must be the Fatiha. | mentions 73:20 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Prophet's constant practice makes abandoning his command forbidden, and Muslims agree that the Fatiha is better and more complete than another recitation. | mentions 24:63 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If the superior prayer with the Fatiha discharges the obligation, it does not follow that the inferior prayer with another passage does; the obligation remains due. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer seeks remembrance of the heart, and this concise surah gathers lordship and servitude and is equated with the mighty Qur'an; nothing else can replace it. | mentions 20:14, 15:87 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Calling the Fatiha “prayer” shows that religious law serves human interests: people most need knowledge of God's lordship and servitude, which the surah's two halves provide to fulfill the covenant. | mentions 17:7, 51:56, 76:2, 2:40 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Since God names the Fatiha “prayer,” prayer without its recitation does not occur; Razi takes this to establish that reciting it is a pillar, as his school holds. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The seven Fatiha verses correspond to the seven bodily prayer acts—standing, bowing, rising, first prostration, rising between prostrations, second prostration, and sitting—as soul to body. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The seven Fatiha verses are the soul of the seven prayer acts, themselves the soul of seven stages of human formation; God is the soul of souls and light of lights. | mentions 23:12, 23:13, 23:14, 53:42 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer was given to Muhammad as a gift for his community because it joins bodily ascent through actions with spiritual ascent through remembrances. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Two recitations assimilate the dāl and lām in either direction, treating them as one word because the terms are used together. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): In the divine hadith, “prayer” means recitation, as in 17:110; because the Fatiha details the division, its recitation is a major pillar of prayer. | mentions 17:110 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): “Qur'an of dawn” in 17:78 means the dawn prayer, as the sound reports say angels of night and day witness it; scholars agree prayer requires recitation. | mentions 17:78 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): The definite article in al-ḥamdu encompasses every kind and form of praise as belonging to God, as expressed in a transmitted prayer. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (الله تعالى): In a divine report, God divides the prayer between Himself and His servant, responds to each recited section, calls 1:5 shared between them, and grants the servant's request. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The Fatiha's many titles converge on مراقبة: it is the Mother of the Book, foundation, oft-repeated, treasure, healing, sufficing, complete, protecting, incantation, praise, thanks, supplication and prayer. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The Fatiha is a treasure, cure, sufficiency, fulfillment, protection and incantation; it gathers praise, gratitude and supplication, with prayer as their greatest assembly. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Harali explains the sound report that God divided prayer between Himself and His servant: the first three verses are God's praise, which He accepts from the reciting servant as praise and glorification. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The Qur'an's arrangement is miraculous, so the Fatiha must retain its required order in prayer; rearrangement or insertion of foreign material invalidates it. Al-Isfahani locates its clearest inimitability in order. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The passage names al-Baqara 2:281 as the last revealed verse and says its recitation position between the debt verse and the verse before it shows revelation and recitation order can differ. | menti
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
