<<chunk 36, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:2/q19", "question": "What inward readings are given for this verse?", "turns_on": "The inward readings differ by which state or divine relation is foregrounded.", "positions": [{"id": "1:2/q19/p1", "position": "All praise arises in God and returns to Him.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Gratitude is acknowledging a blessing with reverence, rooted in the heart and also expressed by the tongue to deny a charge of ingratitude. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): In the mystical reading, guidance brings light to the heart, the blessed become polished mirrors reflecting sanctity, and the final plea seeks protection from desire and doubt. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Kahf’s praise for the revealed Book concerns spiritual nurture through knowledge and unveiling, one kind of the Fātiḥa’s universal nurturing. | mentions 18:1 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Recognizing the true cause detaches the heart from apparent means: every benefit comes from God and every harm is attributed to Him, so praise and requests belong to God alone. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-ḥamdu lillāh has eight letters corresponding to Paradise’s eight gates; saying it with a pure heart merits those gates. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): True praise is any act expressing reverence for a benefactor: inward belief in perfection, spoken words of praise, or bodily deeds that express it; saying al-ḥamdu lillāh merely reports praise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The third class is spirits: lower spirits include good jinn and evil demons; higher ones are attached to celestial bodies or are holy, disembodied spirits. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer was given to Muhammad as a gift for his community because it joins bodily ascent through actions with spiritual ascent through remembrances. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Muhammad's ascent has a bodily journey from Mecca to Jerusalem and then the high kingdom, and a spiritual journey from the visible to the unseen and from the unseen to the unseen of the unseen. | mentions 53:9 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The spiritual ascent rises through human spirits, the spirits of the heavens, angels, throne-bearers, and pure spirits detached from bodies, whose worship and love of God exceed human comprehension. | mentions 39:75, 69:17, 21:20, 12:76 QURTUBI, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Some scholars say gratitude is broader because it can be expressed by tongue, limbs, and heart, while praise is verbal alone. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Some say gratitude is broader because it uses tongue, limbs, and heart, whereas praise is only verbal. BAYDAWI, d. 685 (author): Shukr responds to a blessing through speech, action, and belief; a poem names hand, tongue, and hidden heart as the three responses. NASAFI, d. 710 (author): Unlike hamd, shukr is only for a blessing and can be expressed by heart, tongue, and limbs; the cited poet names hand, tongue, and the veiled heart as its three forms. NASAFI, d. 710 (النبي): A Prophetic report calls praise the head of gratitude and says a servant has not thanked God without praising Him; praise leads because the tongue makes gratitude more public than the hidden heart or ambiguous bodily acts. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Hamd and madḥ may both mean praising what is beautiful, whether a favor or an inherent quality; shukr is specifically for a favor and uses heart, tongue, and limbs, whereas hamd is praise by tongue alone. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The cited poet says favors elicited three forms of gratitude: hand, tongue, and the veiled heart. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): A report calls praise the head of gratitude and says a servant has not thanked God without praising Him; verbal mention spreads notice of a favor more than inward belief or ambiguous bodily acts. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): Divine provision includes general and particular good: outward blessings such as health and livelihood, and inward blessings such as knowledge and recognition. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): God is owner at the final return and recompense; only the worshipped one to whom sovereignty returns can reward enduring blessing for perishable life, as servants shed acts and attributes and receive true existence after annihilation. ABUHAYYAN, d. 745 (بعضهم): Another reported interpretation restricts al-ʿālamīn to spiritual beings. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Other reported scopes include Adam's children, the people of Paradise and Hell, all recipients of provision, every made thing, and spiritual beings; Abū Ḥayyān leaves the correct count to God. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Hamd praises beauty whether or not a favor was bestowed and is expressed only by the tongue; shukr is for a received favor and may be by heart, tongue, or limbs. | mentions 34:13 IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (author): Ibn Kathir questions Ibn Jarir's equation: praise is verbal commendation for necessary or bestowed qualities, while thanks applies only to bestowed qualities and may be inward, spoken, or enacted. IBNKATHIR, d. 774 (جعفر الصادق وابن عطاء): The Sufi authorities Ja'far al-Sadiq and Ibn Ata are reported to hold that praise and thanks are equivalent. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the Qur'an's sevenfold gathering in Muhammad's heart relates to the Mother of Qur'an's universals as the Qur'an's gathering in his heart relates to the Mother. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The following comparison of hearts and stones shows the guided and astray: hearts become hard and wretched, while stones display fear and yield benefit that reaches God's servants. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Alternatively, the surah's purpose is solely to describe the Book; it establishes the truth of its meaning, exposes disbelief and hypocrisy to show that inward faith matters, then proves its inimitable form and authority for teaching law. | mentions 2:21 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says purification is half of faith, al-hamd fills the balance, and glorification fills the space between heaven and earth, among other deeds' spiritual benefits. ALUSI, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī’s own Sufi reading is that souls invoke God by the first name through which they acknowledged Him in the primordial covenant. | mentions 7:172 ALUSI, d. 1270 (الصدر): The praiser must exalt the praised one through praise both outwardly and inwardly. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الدواني): Al-Dawwānī explains al-Sharīf’s requirement of inward and outward exaltation as intending the performative creation of esteem, not belief in a proposition. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الجنيد): Junayd was asked about the spiritual end and answered that it is returning to the beginning, an apt pattern for the sūra’s opening praise. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Other definitions reserve shukr for apparent blessings or, alternatively, for inward blessings. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الراغب): Al-Rāghib points to a definition of shukr as verbal expression for a blessing, while the familiar account includes grateful speech, service by the limbs, and belief and love in the heart. ALUSI, d. 1270 (الطيبي): Al-Ṭībī says the technical usage of the legal theorists means worship, which is complete only through speech, bodily acts, and the heart. ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعض ساداتنا الصوفية): Some Sufis understand the praise as belonging to God Himself, like sovereignty and creation-command: He is both praiser and praised, and all things are His manifestations. | mentions 7:54 ALUSI, d. 1270 (بعض ساداتنا): A Sufi account divides praise from God into praise of His essence, unity, manifestations, qualities, effects, and acts, while creaturely praise varies with knowledge and capacity. | mentions 6:91, 20:110, 37:180, 53:42 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The third element is the praiser, who must exalt the praised in outward expression and inwardly; the next segment debates whether inward belief must match the praise. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The tongue restriction is either relative to heart and limbs or merely usual; hamd originally means displaying perfection, with speech its most familiar form and action potentially fuller. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الدواني): Al-Dawānī explains that praise without belief matching its content would become mockery, taking belief to mean the act of inward exaltation rather than propositional assent. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Definitions distinguish gratitude as bodily deed versus hamd as speech, outward versus inward blessings, or tongue-only thanks for blessings; al-Rāghib’s account limits it to blessing. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الطيبي): Al-Ṭībī calls gratitude by speech, deeds, and heart the technical usage of legal theorists, who mean the obligatory worship of the benefactor; al-Ālūsī rejects the claim that linguistic gratitude is only verbal. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (صاحب التجريد): Some add a fourth form, God thanking God, since only God can thank Him fully; a cited poem contrasts gratitude to people by heart, word, and deed with gratitude to God through His own thanking. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الزمخشري): One account answers how the speakers enact praise by joining verbal praise to bodily and inward worship and seeking aid. | mentions 1:5 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): A further account makes worship the explanation of praise by combining verbal praise with bodily and inward devotion; al-Ālūsī says this does not require choosing genus over comprehensive scope. | mentions 1:5 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Rhetorical address is a divinely used mode even when a proof is available, because it affects hearts and benefits ordinary hearers; al-Ālūsī points to the command to invite with wisdom and good exhortation. | mentions 16:125 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعض ساداتنا الصوفية): Some Sufi masters say “praise belongs to God” is like “might belongs to God”: God is both praiser and praised, and all things are His affairs, as the verse says creation and command belong to Him. | mentions 7:54 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعض ساداتنا الصوفية): A mystical account divides praise into praise originating from God and from creation: 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
