<<chunk 37, part 4 of 0..5>>
لغنوي): Abu al-Sawwar al-Ghanawi reads hiyyaka with hāʾ, another dialect form. QURTUBI (أبو السوار الغنوي): Abū al-Sawwār al-Ghanawī reads hiyyāka in both places as a dialect, citing a line of verse. BAYDAWI (author): Reported readings include iyyāka with fatḥa on hamza and hiyyāka with hamza changed to hāʾ. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Readings include opening إيا's hamza and replacing it with hāʾ. ABUHAYYAN (ابن السوار الغنوي): Ibn al-Sawwār al-Ghanawī reads the forms with either a kasra or fatḥa hamza replaced by hāʾ. IBNKATHIR (بعض القراء): Some read ayyaka with an open hamza and geminated yāʾ, while others substitute hāʾ for hamza, as illustrated by a poetic line. ALUSI (أبو السوار الغنوي): Abū al-Sawwār al-Ghanawī replaces the hamza with hāʾ, using either its kasra or its fatḥa."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p3", "position": "The hamza takes fatḥa.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Another reading has fatḥa on the hamza and a geminated yā. IBNATIYYA (الفضل الرقاشي): Al-Faḍl al-Raqāshī reads ayyaka with fatḥa on the hamza, a well-known dialect form. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الفضل الرقاشي): Al-Fadl al-Raqqashi reads iyyaka with fatḥa on the initial hamza, a well-known dialect form. QURTUBI (الفضل الرقاشي): Al-Faḍl al-Raqāshī reads iyyāka with fatḥa on the hamza, which Qurtubi calls a familiar dialect. QURTUBI-FULL (الفضل الرقاشي): Al-Fadl al-Raqqashi reads ayyaka with an open hamza, a well-known dialect. ABUHAYYAN (الفضل الرقاشي): Al-Faḍl al-Ruqāshī reads it with a fatḥa on hamza and a doubled yāʾ. NASHR (الفضل بن محمد الرقاشي): Al-Fadl b. Muhammad al-Raqashi reads both instances with fatḥa on the hamza; the source also transmits it from Ali through Sufyan al-Thawri. ALUSI (علا وأبو الفضل الرقاشي): ʿAlā and Abū al-Faḍl al-Raqāshī read ayyāka with an open hamza and doubled yāʾ."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p4", "position": "The yāʾ is lightened.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (عمرو بن فائد): ʿAmr ibn Fāʾid reads īyāka with a light yāʾ, avoiding the heavy doubled yāʾ after kasra. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عمرو بن فائد): ʿAmr ibn Faʾid reads iyyaka with kasra on the hamza and a light yāʾ to avoid a doubled yāʾ after kasra. ABUHAYYAN (عمرو بن فائد): ʿAmr ibn Fāʾid, transmitting from Ubayy, reads it with kasra on hamza and an undoubled yāʾ. IBNKATHIR (عمرو بن فايد): Amr ibn Fayd's light yāʾ with kasra is a rejected anomalous reading because iyā means sunlight. NASHR (عمرو بن فائد الإسواري): Amr b. Fa'id reads both instances of iyyāka with a light yā'; some later scholars disliked it because it sounds like iyā, the sun's light. ALUSI (عمرو بن فائد عن أبيّ): ʿAmr ibn Fāʾid, reporting from Ubayy, reads iyyāka with a kasra on the hamza and a light yāʾ. ALUSI-FULL (أبو الفضل الرقاشي): Nonstandard readings include wayyāka with waw, ʾiyyāka with a light yāʾ, ʾayyāka with a doubled yāʾ, and hiyyāka with hāʾ; the majority use the familiar form."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p5", "position": "The initial hamza becomes wāw.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (صاحب اللوامح): The author of al-Lawāmiʿ reports a form wayyāka, with hamza changed to wāw, but is unsure whether it came from al-Farrāʾ or Arab usage. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (صاحب اللوامح): The author of al-Lawāmiḥ records a form wayyāka with wāw substituted for hamza, though he is unsure whether it comes from al-Farrāʾ or Arab usage. ALUSI (author): The form wayyāka, with hamza changed to wāw, occurs, but al-Ālūsī cannot tell whether it comes from readers or Arab usage."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p6", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: the yāʾ is lightened.", "reasons": "QURTUBI (عمرو بن فائد): ʿAmr ibn Fāʾid reads iyyāka with kasra on the hamza and a light yāʾ to avoid doubling a yāʾ after kasra; Qurtubi rejects it because it would mean your sun or its light. QURTUBI-FULL (عمرو بن فائد): ʿAmr ibn Faʾid reads iyyaka with a light yāʾ and kasra on the hamza; the author rejects it because it would mean “your sun” or its light."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p7", "position": "The lightened form is objected to because it resembles a word for sunlight.", "reasons": "QURTUBI (author): Īāya means the sun’s light or its halo-like ring; a verse attributed to Ṭarafa describes the sun’s light on a tooth, and dropping the final hāʾ lengthens the word. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Iāʾ means sunlight, like the halo around the moon; a cited line says sunlight struck the animal’s lip."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p8", "position": "The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p9", "position": "The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience.", "reasons": "THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p10", "position": "Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported. NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported."}, {"id": "1:5/q01/p11", "position": "The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses.", "reasons": "THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses. THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
