<<chunk 38, part 1 of 0..5>>
rect object or the preposition bi-; its verbal noun also shows morphological deletion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Proposed derivations from words for refuge or a verse, along with several morphological reconstructions, are all judged weak. SAMIN-DURR (author): The present verb is nominative because it has no governing subjunctive or jussive; Basran grammarians also explain this by its occupying a noun's position and resembling nouns in form and distribution. SAMIN-DURR (author): The subject of naʿbudu is obligatorily implicit. SAMIN-DURR (author): The syntax of إياك نستعين parallels إياك نعبد, and the conjunction coordinates both inflection and meaning. SAMIN-DURR (الجمهور): Most grammarians say the conjunction does not establish sequence; a group of Kufans disagrees. BURHAN (سيبويه): Sībawayh says that when coordinated matters are both important, Arabic speakers put first the one that matters more or deserves greater attention; the conjunction itself does not order them. ITQAN (ابن الأثير): Ibn al-Athir calls this transition a form of separation better than conjunction: a strong connection between moving from one kind of speech to another."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p3", "position": "Iyyā is a noun or pronoun with an annexed genitive suffix.", "reasons": "TABRISI (أبو إسحاق الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj parses iyyaka as an accusative pronoun stem with the following kaf in genitive annexation. BAYDAWI (الخليل): Al-Khalīl analyzes iyyā as a noun to which attached pronouns are genitive, citing an Arab saying about a man reaching sixty and young women. BAYDAWI-FULL (الخليل): Al-Khalīl considered the following suffix to be annexed to إيا, citing a colloquial example; al-Bayḍāwī says this evidence is anomalous and unreliable. NASAFI (الخليل وسيبويه): Al-Khalil and Sibawayh parse iyya as an independent pronoun; for Sibawayh the kaf is an uninflected address particle, while for al-Khalil it is an attached pronoun in annexation to iyya. ABUHAYYAN (author): Iyyā takes attached first, second, or third person pronouns and forms an independent accusative pronoun, not an overt noun with an annexed suffix, contrary to an unnamed claimant. ABUHAYYAN (author): Annexing iyyā to an overt noun is rare, or a poetic necessity; the text gives examples of both. SAMIN-DURR (author): The rare phrase iyaha al-shawab annexes iyya to an overt noun, supporting the analysis that suffixes are genitive annexes. ALUSI (قيل): One analysis treats the attached elements as nouns to which iyyā is annexed. ALUSI (قيل): Another analysis treats iyyā as an indefinite, ambiguous noun annexed to the attached elements. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): By contrast, Fatihat al-Kitab is a true annexation: al-Kitab here means the remainder of the Book apart from the sura called the Opening. IBNASHUR-FULL (النحاة): Grammarians offer alternatives: إيا alone is the pronoun and its endings reinforce it; إيا is the pronoun and the following letters clarify it; or it is a noun annexed to pronouns."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p4", "position": "The suffix is pronominal and iyyā supports it.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعضهم): Another analysis makes the attached kāf, hāʾ, or yāʾ the pronoun and iyyā a supporting base when the pronoun precedes its verb. BAYDAWI (author): One analysis makes suffixes the pronouns and iyyā their support because pronouns detached from governors cannot be pronounced alone. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Other grammatical analyses treat إيا as the pronoun with an added support element, or treat the entire form as the pronoun. ALUSI (قيل): Another analysis takes the attached elements themselves as the pronoun and iyyā as a supporting element. IBNASHUR (author): Iyyāka is a detached accusative address pronoun; the stronger analysis is that iyyā supports an otherwise detached pronoun, as in iyyāya and iyyāhum. IBNASHUR (النحاة): Grammarians variously analyze iyyā as a fixed-form detached pronoun with an emphatic suffix, the pronoun itself followed by clarifying particles, a pronoun support, or a noun annexed to pronouns. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): إياك is an accusative independent pronoun; the stronger analysis treats إيا as a support for a separated pronoun, explaining the attached forms and its use in warnings when the verb is omitted."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p5", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: a derivation or root for iyyā is proposed or disputed.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda’s derivation of iyyā is weak; Abū Ḥayyān says he was poor at grammar despite mastery of lexicon and Arab history. ABUHAYYAN (author): Several competing root and pattern analyses are proposed for iyyā, but Abū Ḥayyān judges them all weak. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda's derivation of iyyā is weak; Abū Ḥayyān says his expertise was languages and Arab history, not grammar. SAMIN-DURR (author): Some derive iyyā from aw or āya and debate its pattern, but the author says this is useless because morphology does not apply to deeply frozen forms. ALUSI (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda claims that iyyā is derived by word formation; al-Ālūsī calls this astonishing ignorance and refers the discussion to grammar. ALUSI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda proposed a derivation for iyyā, which al-Alusi dismisses as astonishing ignorance."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p6", "position": "The whole iyyāka form is one pronoun or noun.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (بعض الكوفيين): Some Kufan grammarians treat iyāka as a single pronoun, uniquely among pronouns changing its ending. BAYDAWI (author): Another analysis treats the whole form—iyyā plus suffix—as the pronoun. NASAFI-FULL (الكوفيون): The Kufans treat the whole form iyaka as one pronoun. ABUHAYYAN (author): Grammarians differ over whether the pronoun is the whole form or only part of it, whether the suffixes are letters or nouns, and whether iyyā is added solely to host pronouns. SAMIN-DURR (author): Pronoun analyses differ: the whole form is a pronoun; only iyya is; iyya plus suffix marker is; or iyya is support and the suffix is the pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p7", "position": "Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses.", "reasons": "MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p8", "position": "A derivation or root for iyyā is proposed or disputed.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (author): If iyyā is derived, proposed sources include the word in a poetic line and āya, with the latter analysis making its root consonant yāʾ. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The plural pronouns include the reciter with the believers; their collective praise signals Muslim strength and is more eloquent than a solitary confession."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p9", "position": "Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Competing analyses of iyyāka and its suffix are reported; the author prefers iyyā as the pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p10", "position": "The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order.", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order. MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order. MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order. MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order. MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order. MAJAZ (author or reported authority): The direct address and fronted object are explained by Arabic syntax and poetic examples of address and word order."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p11", "position": "Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun.", "reasons": "TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is soug
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
