<<chunk 38, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:5/q02", "question": "What is the grammatical makeup of إِيَّاكَ?", "turns_on": "Whether iyyā, its suffix, or the whole form is pronominal, and how the suffix is governed", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q02/p1", "position": "Iyyā is the independent accusative pronoun with a person marker.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (الأخفش والمحققون): Al-Akhfash and careful grammarians hold that suffixes are not independent pronouns, like the kاف in araʾaytaka. KASHSHAF-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash and the verified grammarians treat the attached kāf, hā, and yā on iyya as markers of address, absence, or speech, not inflected pronouns. IBNATIYYA (بعضهم): Another analysis treats kāf, hāʾ, and yāʾ as the pronouns, unable to stand alone; iyā supports them before verbs while suffixes attach directly after them. IBNATIYYA (بعضهم): A further view takes iyā as an ambiguous accusative pronoun base; its suffixes distinguish addressee, absent person, and speaker and have no syntactic case of their own. IBNATIYYA (الخليل): Al-Khalīl analyzes iyā as a pronoun with the following suffix added for clarification, not to make it definite. IBNATIYYA (المبرد): Al-Mubarrad calls iyā an indefinite, ambiguous noun specified by the following suffix rather than made definite. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الخليل): Al-Khalil analyzes iyyā as an independent pronoun compounded with the following element for clarification rather than identification. IBNATIYYA-FULL (المبرد): Al-Mubarrad calls iyyā an indefinite pronoun made specific, not definite, by what follows. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعض الكوفيين): Some Kufans treat the complete iyyāka as the pronoun, an exceptional one whose ending changes. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعضهم): A further view treats ayyā as an obscure form for the accusative, with suffixes distinguishing addressee, absent person, and speaker but carrying no case role. TABRISI (author): Another explanation treats the repetition as emphasis, though the author questions that account because the second iyyaka is governed by a second verb. TABRISI (المبرد عن الأخفش): Al-Akhfash, transmitted by al-Mubarrad, treats iyyā as a singular pronoun whose ending changes with person and number; kaf marks address and has no case role. TABRISI (author): The author treats yā, hā, and the other suffixes in iyyā as person markers attached to a pronoun, and allows emphatic pronouns after it. QURTUBI (الجمهور من القراء والعلماء): The majority of readers and scholars pronounce the yāʾ in both instances of iyyāka with a shadda. QURTUBI-FULL (العجاج): Al-ʿAjjaj’s line uses an object pronoun before the verb, illustrating the Quranic word order. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Waraq means dirhams when pronounced with kasra on rāʾ and wealth when pronounced with fatḥa. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The pronoun is repeated so readers do not infer that worship is directed to God but aid is sought from someone else. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو السوار الغنوي): Abu al-Sawwar al-Ghanawi reads hiyyaka in both places, a dialect supported by a poetic line. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Iyyaka nastaʿin asks for help, support, and success; one report says confessing both worship and dependence escapes both fatalism and the Qadariyya. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The object is fronted for emphasis and because Arabs put the important item first; the repeated pronoun prevents reading the clause as seeking aid from someone else. BAYDAWI (author): Arabs vary person and address to refresh speech and engage listeners; Bayḍāwī illustrates the shift with Qur'anic examples and Imruʾ al-Qays's changing pronouns. BAYDAWI (author): Iyyā is a detached accusative pronoun; attached yāʾ, kāf, or hāʾ marks person and has no syntactic position, like tāʾ in anta and kāf in araʾaytaka. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The request may seek help in all important matters or specifically in performing acts of worship; the pronoun can include the reciter, angels present, congregants, or all monotheists. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): إيا is the accusative pronoun stem and the attached letters distinguish speaker, addressee, and absent person; the attached forms have no grammatical case of their own. NASAFI (الكوفيون): The Kufans regard iyaka as a complete pronoun rather than dividing it into iyya and the kaf. NASAFI-FULL (author): Sibawayh treats iya as a detached pronoun and the kaf as an address particle without syntactic position; al-Khalil treats iya as the pronoun with the kaf attached to it. ABUHAYYAN (author): In the familiar warning use, iyyā can contain a nominative pronoun that is followed by a nominative emphatic pronoun. ABUHAYYAN (author): Iyyāka is the fronted direct object of naʿbud. ABUHAYYAN (من ذهب إلى أن ملك منادى): If malik is taken as a vocative, iyyāka continues address rather than making an iltifāt; shifts to third person can nevertheless follow a vocative, as the cited poems show. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Iyyā plus attached suffixes is an independent accusative pronoun, not a visible noun in construct; grammarians disagree about the status of the base and suffixes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun has several reported pronunciations: kasra or fatḥa on the hamza with doubled yāʾ, light yāʾ, or replacement of hamza by hāʾ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Iyyāka is an iltifāt from third-person reference to direct address; iltifāt shifts among absent, addressed, and speaker forms while the referent remains one. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): If malik is a vocative, iyyāka is not a shift from absence, since it continues direct address after direct address. SAMIN-DURR (author): A rare reading has a third-person passive form, analyzed as borrowing an accusative pronoun for a nominative subject, with the underlying sense أنت تعبد. SAMIN-DURR (الآخر): A poet uses the second-person suffix in عصيكا where the expected first-person form would be عصيت, illustrating a pronoun substitution parallel. SAMIN-DURR (author): A fronted object pronoun is obligatory when a delayed object would have to attach to its verb; this rule does not apply when attachment is optional. SAMIN-DURR (author): Iyyaka is the object placed before na'budu for exclusivity and must be a detached form. SAMIN-DURR (author): Most grammarians classify iyyaka as a pronoun, while al-Zajjaj treats it as an overt noun. IBNKATHIR (القراء السبعة والجمهور): The seven readers and the majority pronounce the yāʾ in iyyāka with gemination. BURHAN (author): Another explanation is that omission would attach a following pronoun to the second verb and lose the intended emphasis created by placing its object first. BIQAI (author): Repeating the object pronoun urges earnestness in asking for help; the wording also declares that worship is possible only through God's aid and that guidance rests in His hand. BIQAI-FULL (author): Iyyaka addresses the possessor of these attributes, and worship means reaching the utmost abasement; repeating the pronoun intensifies the request for aid. BURSEVI (author): The plural pronoun can include the prayer leader and those present, including recording angels, or all monotheists whose worship and needs the reciter joins. ALUSI (author): The well-known grammatical analysis treats iyyā as a separate accusative pronoun and the attached elements as letters added to clarify its form. ALUSI (قيل): Some say the plural pronoun includes the reciter, the guardian angels, and those present in congregational prayer. ALUSI (قيل): A further analysis identifies the pronoun with the whole compound. ALUSI-FULL (بعض النحاة): Grammarians offer competing analyses of iyyāka: an independent accusative pronoun with added suffixes, a noun with attached pronouns, or a form whose support syllable carries the pronominal force. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): The plural pronouns may include the reciter, guardian angels, and those present in congregational prayer. ELMALILI (author): Exegetes say the plural pronouns refer to the reciter together with guardian angels, the present congregation, or all monotheists. ELMALILI (author): The imperative meaning 'say this' is implicit; placing the independent pronoun before the verb expresses exclusivity: to You alone, not another. IBNASHUR (author): The reverse shift appears in Muhammad ibn Bashir al-Khariji’s poem: it opens by addressing someone, then uses a feminine absent pronoun as the addressee seems to shrink from view. IBNASHUR (author): The author’s note adds that ‘servitude’ can be more emphatic than ‘worship’ because the relational formation is intensified by the nisba suffix, as in asḥamī versus asḥam. TABATABAI (author): The plural first-person pronoun humbles the individual by dissolving a sense of separate selfhood and independence into the wider community of worshippers. TABATABAI (author): The prior discussion explains the shift to direct address, object-fronting for exclusivity, unrestricted worship, the plural pronoun, and the relation of the two clauses. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (روح المعاني): The repetition emphasizes seeking aid from God, since without it the source of aid may remain unspecified; one pronoun could also imply the two acts occur only together. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (التفسير القيم): Repeating the object pronoun gives worship and fear exclusive force and focus that omitting its repetition would lack. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Repeating إياك explicitly restricts both worship and reliance independently; one pronoun could leave reliance unexpressed or imply that either depends on the other."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p2", "position": "The grammar and form of the pronouns or verbs are analyzed.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (بعضهم): One analysis deletes the second of the two adjacent quiescent alifs because it was added for grammatical meaning and is more expendable. TABRISI (author): Naʿbudu and nastaʿīn are indicative because they occupy positions that can be filled by nouns; the present tense takes inflection because it resembles a noun. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The line “to You until I reached iyāka” is anomalous and cannot serve as a grammatical model. ABUHAYYAN (author): Istaʿāna can take a di
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
