<<chunk 38, part 4 of 0..5>>
rves the verse's cadence.", "reasons": "CORPUSCORANICUM (Devin Stewart): Stewart explains the marked object-first word order as a way to achieve the rhyme."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p9", "position": "The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience.", "reasons": "THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains address, iyyāka's grammar and reading, object fronting, and worship as humble obedience."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q04", "question": "Why does the discourse address God directly here?", "turns_on": "Whether the change is iltifāt, an implied command to say, or continuation of an earlier address; explanations of its effect vary", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q04/p1", "position": "The discourse turns from speaking about God to addressing Him directly.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The shift from third-person praise to direct address is rhetorical iltifat; the explanation of its purpose continues in the next segment. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Iltifat shifts among speech styles, as Quranic examples and Imru al-Qays's three successive shifts show; changing style renews attention and can carry special benefits. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Direct address here makes the one already described as worthy of praise vivid, so worship and help are confined to the God whose qualities make Him deserving. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The verbal noun istiʿāna derives from istiʿwānan; the wāw shifts its vowel, then a long vowel is dropped and hāʾ compensates for it. TABRISI (author): The move from third-person reference to direct address is a familiar Arabic rhetorical shift, illustrated by Labid and Abu Kathir al-Hudhali. TABRISI (author): Nastaʿīn originally had waw from maʿūna; the waw changed to yā under the preceding kasra, with its vowel shifted to the preceding consonant. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī says Arabic can shift from third person to address and back, citing Yunus 10:32 and al-Insān 76:21–22; Labīd's line illustrates the idiom. RAZI-FULL (author): The transition from third person praise to direct address can be understood as God lifting the veil and drawing near after the worshiper has praised and acknowledged His attributes. RAZI-FULL (author): Direct address suits requests and service in God’s presence; the sūrah uses third person for praise and shifts to direct address for supplication, as prophets do. QURTUBI (author): The wording shifts from third-person report and praise of God to direct address, an iltifāt; Qurtubi compares the shift in 76:21 and its reverse in 10:22. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Iyyaka naʿbudu shifts from third-person praise to direct address; worship means obedient submission, and speaking the verse confesses God’s lordship amid others worshipping idols. BAYDAWI (author): After naming the one deserving praise and describing His distinguishing attributes, the discourse directly addresses Him; this moves from proof and absence to presence and witnessing, the knower's culmination after reflection on God's names, gifts, and works. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): After identifying the one worthy of praise, the discourse turns from absence to direct address and from reasoning to witnessing: the servants reserve worship and seeking aid for Him. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The shift of person is an Arabic device that refreshes speech and engages listeners, as in 10:22 and 35:9 and the cited poetry of Imruʾ al-Qays. NASAFI (author): The verse shifts from speaking about God in the third person to addressing Him directly after praise establishes His attributes and greatness; the worshipper turns to the uniquely worthy addressee to worship and seek help from no other. NASAFI (author): Iltifat can shift from third person to address, address to third person, or third person to first person; Nasafi illustrates the pattern with shifts in Qur’an 10:22 and 35:9 and Imru’ al-Qays’s poem, where the speaker changes person across its three lines. NASAFI (author): Arabs favor shifts of style because they engage listeners, renew attention, and make listening more pleasurable; particular placements also carry subtleties recognized by expert scholars. NASAFI-FULL (author): The shift from third-person reference to direct address is iltifat; Arabic rhetoric uses such shifts to refresh attention and heighten reception, and the cited Qur'anic and poetic examples illustrate its forms. NASAFI-FULL (author): Direct address follows the great descriptions of God: the one worthy of praise, humility, and aid is addressed as the uniquely distinguished Lord described above. ABUHAYYAN (author): In these forms wāw shifts to alif in istaʿāna and mustaʿān, and to yāʾ in nastaʿīn and mustaʿīn; deletion in istiʿāna belongs to morphology. ABUHAYYAN (author): Iyyāka is an iltifāt from third-person reference, since a consistent third-person construction would say iyyāhu. ABUHAYYAN (author): Iltifāt shifts among third person, address, and first person, in any direction; the same referent must remain in view, whether named or pronominal. ABUHAYYAN (author): Rhetoricians cite iltifāt as a display of command over expression; some also seek a distinct local effect, and Ibn al-Athīr wrote notably on the device. ABUHAYYAN (author): The direct address in iyyāka naʿbud is a preparation for the supplication ihdinā that follows. ABUHAYYAN (author): Directly addressing God as present refutes materialists, atheists, and those who deny a creator. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The shift draws the worshipper into direct address after praising God as Lord, Merciful, and King, and prepares the ensuing supplication for guidance. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The shift to direct address in “You alone we worship,” “You alone we seek help,” and “guide us” is iltifāt. SAMIN-DURR (author): The phrase shifts from speaking about God in the third person to addressing Him directly, a rhetorical turn; Yūnus 10:22 offers the reverse direction. SAMIN-DURR (author): The Imruʾ al-Qays example has three shifts: first person to address, then to third person, then back to first person. SAMIN-DURR (author): The anomalous form also shifts from direct address in إياك to third person in يعبد; the author calls this an unusual shift within one clause. IBNKATHIR (author): The speech shifts from speaking of God in the third person to addressing Him directly because praise brings the worshipper near and present before Him. BURHAN (author): Al-Fātiḥa begins in third-person style through “Master of the Day of Judgment,” then turns to direct address with “You alone we worship.” BURHAN (القاضي شمس الدين بن الجوزي): Ibn al-Jawzī explains the shift from praise to direct address by the listener’s changing attention: the praise awakens the heart, making “You alone” apt. BURHAN (author): The particular reasons for a shift of style depend on its setting and on the speaker’s purpose. BURHAN (قيل): One explanation says praise uses third person because it ranks below worship, while direct address elevates the worshipper's encounter; similarly, blessing is explicitly attributed to God but anger is phrased obliquely as a matter of etiquette. BIQAI (author): After God's entitlement and mercy have been established, a rational person turns to Him alone; the passage shifts from speaking about Him to addressing Him directly. BIQAI (author): The direct address names the possessor of the preceding attributes; putting the means of worship before the requested need is more likely to bring a response. BIQAI-FULL (author): After establishing God's worthiness and prompting hope and fear, the recitation turns from third person to direct address and puts the means before the request. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): The fourth verse contains the clear letter in worship and the ambiguous letter in seeking help; because it is intimate direct address, its request is not repeated. ALUSI (author): When praise reaches its highest limit, the discourse turns to direct address to God. ALUSI (author): The general function of shifting from absence to direct address is variation of style, refreshing the discourse and engaging the listener. ALUSI (قيل): Another explanation is that praise and divine favor elevate the servant to ihsan, worshipping as if seeing God; the direct address and worship express Islam’s outward form, faith’s meaning, and ihsan’s light. ALUSI (قيل): Since God is King throughout all time and sees past and future equally, the shift to address is fitting. ALUSI (قيل): Another view says praise belongs naturally to the language of absence, while prayer belongs to presence and direct address, since God is living and generous. ALUSI (قيل): Another explanation assigns absence to praise, which is complete even at a distance, and direct address to worship, which is due to the ever-present God; Abraham’s rejection of setting stars illustrates the latter. ALUSI (قيل): One explanation sees direct address as a gift to the modest person who feels far from God: divine mercy brings that person into closeness and intimate presence. ALUSI (قيل): When veils and otherness vanish from the seeker’s view, only God remains, so speech turns entirely to direct address; the explanation cites the verse that wherever one turns is God’s face. ALUSI (السيوطي عن الشيخ بهاء الدين): Al-Suyūṭī transmits from Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn that scholars agree there is one shift in this passage. ALUSI-FULL (author): Because the Fatiha's praise reaches its limit here, the prayer turns to direct address in Iyyaka naʿbudu wa-iyyaka nastaʿīn. ALUSI-FULL (author): One explanation of the shift to direct address is that divine attributes made God a particular known reality, moving the worshipper from proof and thought to immediate witnessing. ALUSI-FULL (author): Since past and future are alike to God, who owned all ages eternally, the shift from third person to direct address is fitting. ALUSI-FULL (author): A person who recognizes his distance from God through humility is especially apt to receive mercy that draws him into 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
