<<chunk 38, part 5 of 0..5>>
intimacy and direct address. ALUSI-FULL (author): The earlier phrase al-ḥamdu lillāh itself may contain a shift depending on whether Say is supplied, so the dispute over one, two, or no shifts turns on grammatical and rhetorical assumptions. IBNASHUR (author): Here the praiser’s thought reaches its limit after praising God’s attributes, imagines himself in the divine presence, and turns directly to his Lord; this is a striking iltifāt. IBNASHUR (author): The shift to direct address also moves from praise into supplication, which naturally calls for address and leads into the request for guidance in 1:6. IBNASHUR (أبو الفتح ابن جني): Ibn Jinni calls iltifāt ‘the bravery of Arabic,’ treating it as evidence of a rhetorician’s agility in directing speech as he wishes. IBNASHUR (الجمهور من أئمة البلاغة): Most rhetoricians define iltifāt as switching the mode used for the same referent after first expressing it through one of speech, absence, or address. IBNASHUR (السكاكي): Al-Sakkaki defines iltifāt as choosing a mode of speech, address, or absence other than the mode most fitting at that point. IBNASHUR (الجمهور والسكاكي): Alqama’s opening line addresses the speaker’s own heart by tajrīd; the majority do not count this as iltifāt, while al-Sakkaki does. IBNASHUR (author): The majority’s name for iltifāt likens changing expression to a viewer turning away; al-Sakkaki likely retained the established label although tajrīd does not fit the usual image. IBNASHUR (author): Iltifāt refreshes expression of the same meaning, renewing the listener’s attention instead of repeating one style until it becomes tedious; al-Sakkaki likens this to varying hospitality for souls. IBNASHUR-FULL (الجمهور): Most rhetoricians define iltifat as shifting the same referent among first, second, and third person; al-Sakkaki instead defines it as choosing a person-form other than the contextually apt one. IBNASHUR-FULL (السكاكي): Al-Sakkaki counts apostrophe to one's own heart as iltifat, whereas other rhetoricians classify Alqama's example as tajrid; Ibn Ashur explains the difference in their definitions. IBNASHUR-FULL (السكاكي): Iltifat refreshes listeners by varying expression, like varying flavors for guests; rhetoricians also find additional contextual subtleties in individual shifts. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Muhammad ibn Bashir's poem illustrates the reverse shift: after addressing himself, the speaker describes his deficient judgment in third person, as if the self had receded from view. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Quran's shift in 29:23 stigmatizes the disbelievers by naming their rejection of God's signs before reporting their despair of His mercy. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The address also moves naturally from praise into supplication, which requires direct address and leads into the request guide us to the path. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The shift from third person into first person is natural because the first person is the normal form for things attributed to the speaker. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The shift from speaking about God to addressing Him is iltifāt, a rhetorical turn between grammatical perspectives. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Addressing someone just described in the third person can express a tactful intimacy more strongly than saying of him, I seek him. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The direct address prepares for the supplication that follows in guide us. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The opening praise is fittingly in the third person, while supplication from this point onward is fittingly direct address. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (قيل): Praise is fuller in the absent form, but worship is due to the ever-present God; hence praise uses third person and worship direct address. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The shift from third-person praise to direct address is iltifat; it renews attention and suits addressing God as present when worshippers pray. STUDYQURAN (author): Verse 5 shifts from describing God to direct second-person address; the first-person plural represents people and creation, expressing humility before God."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p2", "position": "The discourse turns to direct address for rhetorical effect.", "reasons": "RAZI (author): Legal works explain bodily duties, while duties of the heart are greater, weightier and more elevated; books of ethics and statecraft address them across different religions and peoples. RAZI-FULL (author): Fiqh addresses obligations of bodily acts, while obligations of the heart are greater and nobler and are treated in ethics and political writings across different communities. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship transfers a person from the deceptive world and preoccupation with creatures into joy and the presence of God, bringing complete delight. ABUHAYYAN (author): Addressing a present person directly is more tactful and effective than referring to him as absent with iyyāhu. BURHAN (author): Human beings begin distant from God behind the veil of majesty; knowing and praising Him and worshipping as befits them makes them ready to address Him directly. BURSEVI (author): The seeker advances from the darkness of the self to certainty that no one owns or rules except the Owner of Judgment Day, then addresses Him directly in worship. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī’s own allusion is to the Resurrection: believers will attain the joy of divine presence, private audience without an interpreter, and unveiled intimate address; this mercy follows the warning of Judgment. IBNASHUR (author): Addressing a great person with praise before speaking to him is an established Arab convention. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Here the worshipper, carried to the limit of reflection by praising God's greatness, imagines himself in the divine presence and turns to address Him directly. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The communal voice keeps praising God during the move from praise to intimate address, like al-Nābigha's enumeration of nations to suggest al-Nuʿmān's greatness. TABATABAI (الصادق): Al-Sadiq rejects worship through an attribute detached from perception as addressing an absent object, and rejects worship of both attribute and described essence as violating tawhid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Calling God Rabb of all worlds establishes His presence everywhere and always, so addressing Him as present is apt. STUDYQURAN (author): Direct second-person address establishes an I-Thou relation and gives every person access to God without a priestly intermediary; worshippers should be fully present and devote religion solely to Him."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p3", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: the discourse turns from speaking about god to addressing him directly.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī counts three iltifāts in Imruʾ al-Qays’s lines, but Abū Ḥayyān identifies only two: address to third person, then third person to first person. ABUHAYYAN (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects identifying the first shift by inferred presence: iltifāt concerns actual wording, and inserting an unspoken say before either phrase would remove the shift. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects al-Zamakhsharī's three-iltifāt analysis of Imruʾ al-Qays's lines, finding two shifts and rejecting the proposed movement to presence. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Some critics correct al-Zamakhsharī's count to two shifts, rather than three; the author answers that the opening address itself shifts from the expected first person."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p4", "position": "An implied command to say the words explains the address.", "reasons": "QURTUBI (author): Qurtubi treats the implied command to say as a common Arabic ellipsis whose context supplies the omitted words, and says the same construction applies to the later address, as though it said, Say, You alone we worship. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام السيوطي): Al-Suyuti, quoting Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn, says there is agreement on one shift in person; al-Alusi argues that the count depends on whether one supplies the command Say and on rival definitions of iltifāt."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p5", "position": "God teaches servants to recite the praise and address, with an implied command to say.", "reasons": "TAB (author or reported authority): God teaches servants to recite the praise and address, with an implied command to say. TAB (author or reported authority): God teaches servants to recite the praise and address, with an implied command to say."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p6", "position": "The address continues an earlier vocative rather than shifting person.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (النجمي): A person who reaches witnessing his Lord sees the beauty of his true Owner and addresses Him as a humbled, helpless servant; some read Malik as a vocative."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p7", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: an implied command to say the words explains the address.", "reasons": "ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī questions that consensus: on al-Zamakhsharī and al-Sakkākī’s account, supplying an implied say can yield two shifts, while other assumptions yield none; the count depends on the analysis."}, {"id": "1:5/q04/p8", "position": "Arabic poetry and Qur'an illustrate the shift to direct address.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Arabic poetry and Qur'an illustrate the shift to direct address."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
