<<chunk 38, part 3 of 0..5>>
 mutual assistance exists; the restriction means reliance on God for grave matters beyond human help. IBNASHUR (author): The two restrictions indirectly rebuke polytheists: some worshipped other gods while forgetting God, including Sabaʾ and groups among Persians, Egyptians, and peoples of Sudan. IBNASHUR (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet teaches Ibn ʿAbbas: ‘If you ask, ask God; if you seek help, seek God’; the wording has no explicit object-fronting restriction. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The declaration of exclusive worship purges associationism. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): After completing praise, the speaker turns to God in an initial independent address, showing exclusive devotion through worship and seeking help in recognition of God's due. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): For Ibn Ashur, glossing iyyaka naʿbudu merely as we worship You misses its full intent because fronting the object signals exclusivity. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The fronted object in إياك نعبد gives true exclusivity: believers reciting this praise worship God alone. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): وإياك نستعين coordinates with إياك نعبد; the clauses are not separated as in a sequence of petitions because the worshippers emphasize both acts in the same exclusive commitment. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Fronting إياك نستعين gives hyperbolic, claimative exclusivity: people do help one another, but great matters beyond human aid are sought from God alone. This indirectly rebukes polytheists who worship other beings or use them as intermediaries. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Repeating إياك marks distinct restrictions: worship is truly exclusive to God, while aid is only rhetorically exclusive because people may help one another; ultimate aid belongs to God. TABATABAI (author): This absolute ownership on both sides creates a twofold exclusivity: God alone is master and the servant is wholly devoted, expressed by fronting the object and leaving worship unrestricted. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): After describing God’s attributes and relation to creation and judgment, the passage voices the believers’ response: worship and help-seeking belong exclusively to Him. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Fronting may also serve praise, glorification, magnification, or disparagement, although exclusivity is its most common effect. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Fronting before a word's governor usually marks exclusivity: ‘I helped Khālid’ does not, while ‘Khālid I helped’ singles him out. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): The object ‘You’ is fronted with worship and seeking help because these belong exclusively to God; worship is similarly exclusive in 39:66 and 2:172. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): Fronting can place a word before its governing verb, as in “You alone we worship”; it can also reorder words that are not the verb’s object. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): Fronting an object usually conveys exclusivity: “I helped Khalid” permits helping others too, while “Khalid I helped” singles him out. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): Fronting “You” before worship and seeking help makes both acts exclusive to God; the verse does not front the object of guidance because guidance is not requested exclusively for oneself. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): The fronted phrases “upon God” and “to Him” in commands to trust and turn back likewise signal that trust and repentance belong to God alone. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Fronting You in both verbs restricts worship and seeking aid to God alone, as also expressed in other calls to worship and trust in God. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): I worship you states an act but does not exclude worshipping others; fronting You states that worship is exclusive. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): After naming the One worthy of praise and describing His great attributes, direct address makes the exclusive worship and aid owed to Him more vivid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (التفسير القيم): Exclusive worship is the remedy for ostentation, and seeking aid from God is the remedy for pride and vanity. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God’s lordship over all entails that He alone is Lord, while exclusive worship and reliance affirm that there is no deity but Him. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Fronting إياك restricts worship and reliance to God alone; the author compares this exclusive order with exclusive trust and turning in 60:4 and 14:12. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Fronting إيانا would wrongly restrict guidance to us alone; unlike worship and reliance, guidance is not requested exclusively for the speaker's group. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): This kind of preposing usually conveys restriction: Khalid I helped restricts the help to Khalid, unlike I helped Khalid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Fronted إياك restricts worship and seeking help to God alone, as do other Quranic frontings that restrict worship, gratitude, trust, and turning back to Him."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p2", "position": "Fronting gives God prominence and reverent priority.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (author): The object is placed before the verb for emphasis and importance, following the Arabic tendency to put what matters first. IBNATIYYA (author): An anecdote illustrates fronting what matters: an abused man answers “I turn away from you” after being told “You are whom I mean.” IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The object is fronted to give it emphasis and priority, a normal Arabic ordering when the object is most important. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): An anecdote illustrates fronting for emphasis: an insulted man answers “You I ignore” after being told “You are the one I mean.” QURTUBI (author): The object is brought before the verb because Arabs place what matters first; this also puts the worshiped before mention of the worshiper and worship, following the Qur’anic wording. QURTUBI (العجاج): Al-ʿAjjāj’s line uses the fronted object in I call upon You, illustrating the Qur’anic word order. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The sūra uses fronting and delay in “we worship, we seek help” and in “those angered, those astray.” ALUSI (author): Putting God first directs the worshipper’s attention to the true object, strengthens reverence, counters distraction and lethargy, and excludes any opening for association. ALUSI-FULL (إبن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās glosses the fronted object as meaning that we worship no one besides You, repudiating idolatry and implicitly addressing polytheists. ALUSI-FULL (author): Fronting You reflects God's precedence over worshippers and worship in existence, and immediately directs the worshipper's attention toward the true object of devotion. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Samarrāʾ distinguishes fronting a word before its own governor from reordering words relative to each other. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Al-hamd may appear to apply to God or another, so naming God clarifies it; worship can only be for God, so fronting You in 1:5 prevents an implication of worshipping another. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Preposing includes placing a word before its governing word, such as fronting the object before its verb; other examples include fronted circumstantials and adverbial phrases. STUDYQURAN (author): Naʿbudu means worship, servitude, obedience, and adoration; the verse acknowledges all creation as God’s servants and places the direct object before the verb to express complete servitude."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p3", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: fronting restricts worship and seeking help to god alone.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (بعض المنتمين للصلاح): Some pious interpreters restrict worship to knowledge and seeking help to gnosis, but Abū Ḥayyān says the wording gives no evidence for these restrictions. ITQAN (author): The author answers that “sincerely devoting religion to Him” already implies restriction; even without it, a clause may name the restricted object without restrictive syntax, while “rather worship God” strongly implies exclusivity after the warning against shirk. ELMALILI (author): Although worship could suggest a specific request for aid, the verse's monotheistic emphasis and context of God's exclusive praise require a general meaning."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p4", "position": "Fronting gives the object priority and attention.", "reasons": "QURTUBI (أعرابي): A Bedouin exchange illustrates foregrounding what matters: when a man said You are the one I mean, the other replied that he was turning away from him. ABUHAYYAN (author): An Arab addressed an insulter with iyyāka aʿnī; the reply wa-ʿanka aʿriḍ shows that speakers front what matters most."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p5", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: fronting gives emphasis or attention without necessarily restricting the object.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī takes object fronting to mean exclusivity, as though the verse said only you we worship; Abū Ḥayyān says it instead signals care and attention to the object. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects compulsory restriction from fronting: it may express attention and care for the object, as ordinary Arabic examples show."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p6", "position": "Fronting gives emphasis or attention without necessarily restricting the object.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR (ابن الحاجب): Ibn al-Hajib argues that fronting the object conveys emphasis but not restriction, and reads 1:5 as emphasis rather than exclusivity; he cites the wording of 39:2 against relying on 39:66. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن الحاجب): Ibn al-Hajib argues that fronting the object in إياك نعبد marks emphasis only, not exclusivity, and says the cited exclusivity proofs are weak."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p7", "position": "The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn. KASHSHAF (author or reported authority): The source analyzes iyyāka, exclusive object fronting, readings, worship, and rhetorical turn."}, {"id": "1:5/q03/p8", "position": "Fronting se
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
