<<chunk 38, part 2 of 0..5>>
ht for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p12", "position": "Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix. ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix. ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix. ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix. ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix. ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Worship is obedient submission; iyyāka is analyzed as an accusative pronoun with an annexed suffix."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p13", "position": "Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Pronoun categories, a proposed derivation of iyyāka, and its exclusive force are discussed."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p14", "position": "Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained. BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained. BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p15", "position": "God instructs the Prophet to speak directly; iyyāka is the object pronoun.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author or reported authority): God instructs the Prophet to speak directly; iyyāka is the object pronoun. AKHFASH (author or reported authority): God instructs the Prophet to speak directly; iyyāka is the object pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p16", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: iyyā is a noun or pronoun with an annexed genitive suffix.", "reasons": "TABRISI (أبو علي الفارسي): Abu Ali rejects treating iyyā as a noun: its form changes and it cannot stand in nominative or genitive contexts like an ordinary noun."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p17", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: iyyā is the independent accusative pronoun with a person marker.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Repetition as mere emphasis is rejected because the second Iyyaka is the separate object of nastaʿīn, not a redundant object of the first verb."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p18", "position": "Iyyāka is accusative as the object in both clauses.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is accusative as the object in both clauses."}, {"id": "1:5/q02/p19", "position": "The direct address needs no vocative accusative; revelation commands the Prophet to say it.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The direct address needs no vocative accusative; revelation commands the Prophet to say it."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q03", "question": "Why is إِيَّاكَ placed before its verb?", "turns_on": "Whether fronting itself restricts the object or chiefly gives it prominence, and whether cadence explains the order", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q03/p1", "position": "Fronting restricts worship and seeking help to God alone.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Fronting the object gives exclusive force, as in 39:64 and 6:164. KASHSHAF (author): The speakers devote worship and request help exclusively to God, seeking neither from anyone else. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Putting the object first expresses exclusivity: worship and the request for help are directed to God alone. TABRISI (author): Fronting iyyaka makes the worship and request exclusive: we worship You alone and ask help from You alone. RAZI-FULL (author): The exclusive address “You alone we worship” amounts to pure monotheism and the confession that there is no deity but God. RAZI-FULL (author): The sūrah elaborates the five formulas of the familiar remembrance: praise establishes God's qualities, exclusive worship states monotheism, and asking His help expresses that no aim is fulfilled without Him. BAYDAWI (author): Fronting the object signals reverence, importance, and exclusivity; Ibn ʿAbbās glosses it “We worship You and no other.” BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Fronting إياك conveys honor, concern, and exclusivity; Ibn ʿAbbās glosses it “we worship You and worship no other.” NASAFI (author): Putting the object before the verb expresses exclusivity: worshippers devote worship, the utmost humility and submission, and their request for aid to God alone. NASAFI-FULL (author): Fronting the object marks exclusivity: worship and the seeking of aid are directed to God alone; worship is the utmost submission and abasement. ABUHAYYAN (author): The verse God gives in 20:14 places worship after exclusive monotheism, because monotheism is the foundation and worship its branch. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī says fronting iyyāka restricts worship to God alone, equivalent to saying We worship no one but You. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض المنتمين للصلاح): Some spiritually inclined interpreters assign worship to knowledge and seeking help to mystical gnosis, but Abū Ḥayyān finds no textual indication for these restrictions. BURHAN (author): Fronting the object in “You alone we worship” expresses exclusive worship: we worship You and no one else. BURHAN (author): The successive praises intensify the servant's attention: God's exclusive praise, universal lordship, gifts of mercy, and command of judgment prepare the worshipper to approach and seek help. BURHAN (قيل): Another explanation says that after describing God with magnificent attributes, the discourse directly addresses the clearly identified one worthy of exclusive worship and reliance. BIQAI (author): Knowledge of God's acts and attributes establishes His right to exclusive worship and then reveals the worshipper's inability to fulfill that right, prompting the request for aid. BIQAI-FULL (author): The Fatiha's purpose is to establish God's exclusive right to all praise and perfection, sovereignty over both worlds, worship and aid, and to ask for the path of the successful rather than the doomed; its center is مراقبة. ITQAN (أهل البيان): Rhetoricians generally say fronting an object, adverbial, or prepositional phrase conveys restriction; thus the verse means that worship and help are directed to God alone. ITQAN (author): Exclusive wording implies exclusion of all others: there is no god or guardian besides God, and worship is directed to God alone. BURSEVI (author): Worship belongs exclusively to God because its ultimate reverence is due only to the greatest benefactor, who creates the beneficiary and gives life. ALUSI (author): Fronting the object signals restriction and exclusivity, a marked departure from ordinary order; Ibn ʿAbbās glosses it as worshipping no one else. ALUSI (author): Islam begins by restricting worship to God and escaping idolatry; exclusive reliance on God follows once that commitment is established. ALUSI (قيل): After God is identified by distinguishing attributes and becomes a definite object of knowledge, direct address marks greater exclusivity and a rise from inference to vision and presence. ALUSI (author): The unrestricted request includes all help needed for worship, its prerequisites, and associated matters, just as God’s bestowed favor is described without restriction. QUTB-ZILAL (author): Exclusive worship liberates people from subjection to other people, systems, social arrangements, superstition, and delusion. IBNASHUR (author): Fronting the object in ‘You alone we worship’ gives true restriction: the believers taught this praise worship none but God. IBNASHUR (author): The clause ‘and You we ask for help’ is coordinated with worship; it is not separated by the repetition common in supplicatory enumeration, emphasizing that both acts matter under this restriction. IBNASHUR (author): Fronting the object in seeking help gives an assertive, rhetorical restriction, since ordinary
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
