<<chunk 39, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:5/q05", "question": "What does نَعْبُدُ mean?", "turns_on": "Whether worship is fundamentally submission, obedience, affirming unity, supplication, or devoted service", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q05/p1", "position": "Worship fundamentally means humility and submission.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Worship is utmost submission and abasement; related ʿabada describes thick, strongly woven cloth. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Worship is the utmost submission and humility, reserved for God because He is the giver of the greatest blessings. IBNATIYYA (author): The believer's declaration confesses God's lordship, expresses humility, and affirms worship of God, unlike people who worship idols. IBNATIYYA (author): Naʿbudu means to uphold the law and commands with humility and submission; maʿbad likewise names a smoothed path or camel. IBNATIYYA (طرفة): Ṭarafa's phrase “over a smoothed path” supports the lexical sense of maʿbad as something made smooth. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Worship means observing the law and commands with humility and submission; maʿbad describes a well-trodden path or a tamed camel, as in Tarafa's line. TABRISI (author): Worship linguistically means abasement, as in a road worn smooth by traffic or a camel coated with tar; seeking assistance means asking for help. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi moves from lordship to servitude: the body is an instrument for the soul, and worship is its best state and the first stage of human felicity; divine aid and guidance are the next stages. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship is an act performed to magnify another; the word is related to a well-trodden, level road, طريق معبد. RAZI-FULL (author): Because an individual's worship is mixed with shortcomings, he joins it to the worship of all worshipers; like a sale of ten slaves accepted all together or rejected all together, God may accept it with the worship of angels, prophets, and saints. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship is a trust: fulfilling it is required and intrinsically excellent, and faithfulness in one direction brings God's faithfulness in return; 33:72 and 4:58 support the duty. RAZI-FULL (أهل التحقيق): The highest rank worships God because He is God and Creator and the worshiper is His servant; this joins awe with humility, and intending prayer for God keeps it valid. QURTUBI (الهروي): Naʿbud means we obey; worship is obedience joined with humility. Al-Harawī compares a trodden, smoothed road called muʿabbad. BAYDAWI (author): ʿIbāda is utmost submission and humility, from maʿbad, a smoothed road, and a garment of exceptional thickness; thus it is used only for submission to God. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): ʿIbāda is the utmost submission and abasement, and is used only for submission to God. ABUHAYYAN (الجمهور): The majority explain worship as humility and submission, which Abū Ḥayyān later identifies as the basic lexical sense. ABUHAYYAN (author): Worship is an exalted station, commanded in scripture and used as an honorific for the most excellent creatures, including the Prophet and Jesus. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن السكيت): Ibn al-Sikkīt glosses ʿibāda as tajrīd, while the majority gloss it as humility and submission. SAMIN-DURR (author): Worship is ultimate submission, due only to the ultimate benefactor, and is stronger than ʿubūdiyya, which is outwardly showing submission. IBNKATHIR (بعض الصوفية): Some Sufis criticize worship motivated by reward or avoidance of punishment, and even worship as honor through religious duties, arguing that the highest worship is for God's own perfection. BIQAI (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī defines worship as reaching the utmost degree in all forms of humble submission. BIQAI-FULL (author): Worship is possible only through God's aid, and guidance lies in His hand; the sequence moves from essence to acts to attributes and back to essence, teaching dependence after recognizing God's right. DURR-FULL (ربكم): The continuation of Ubayy b. Kaʿb's report assigns the first three Fātiḥa verses to God, the middle verse to both, and the final three to the servant; worship is the servant's and aid comes from God. BURSEVI (author): Pairing worship with dependence combines pride in serving God with humility about needing His aid, and removes worshipper's conceit. ALUSI (author): Worship is the highest degree of submissive humility. ALUSI (قيل): Some restrict the word worship to submission directed to God; references to people worshipping other things describe their own false assumption and rebuke their stupidity. ALUSI (بعض المحققين): Some careful scholars distinguish three levels: worship for reward or fear of punishment (the lower level, called ʿibāda); worship as honor, acceptance of duties, or affiliation (the middle level, ʿubūdiyya); and submission solely because God deserves it (the highest, ʿubūda). ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī’s note says his three-level account answers the objection that, if worship is the highest submission, most believers would not count as worshippers. ALUSI (author): For the gnostic, God is the first and primary object of attention; worship is only a vehicle of approach, leaving the seeker absorbed in divine majesty and beauty. ALUSI (author): Since worship is a trust, al-Ālūsī says concern for fulfilling it warrants placing it first. ALUSI (author): Worship is a means, so placing it before the request for aid is like offering a means before asking for what one needs. ALUSI (author): Worship is an inescapable duty and is presented as the purpose for which humans and jinn were created, so it has priority. ALUSI-FULL (author): Worship is the highest degree of submission and is due only to God, who bestowed the greatest gifts of life and existence; therefore prostration to another is forbidden. ALUSI-FULL (author): Worship is a means, so it properly precedes the request for a need and may make that request more readily answered. ALUSI-FULL (author): Worship is an unavoidable duty and the stated purpose for creating humans and jinn, so it deserves precedence. ELMALILI (author): True worship unites outward and inward submission without pride or ostentation; arrogant people, heedless optimists, and despairing pessimists are excluded from its honor. ELMALILI (author): The proud objector asks whether worship's humility is degrading for a soul that wants to rise or believes it has already risen. ELMALILI (author): Although humans have no inherent rights before God, He recognizes their rights and assumes them under His mercy; worship is His right and the servant's duty, while aid, reward, and punishment become human claims by His own commitment. ELMALILI (cumhûr-i müfessirîn): The majority of exegetes define worship as the utmost degree of humility, which entails complete obedience without asking the reason. ELMALILI (author): Another explanation says worship is doing what God approves while ubudiyet is being content with what God does; its usage can be narrower or broader, and Prophetic ubudiyet is more specific than ibadat. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ordinary العبادة is submissive or exceptionally reverent action; obedience is a figurative extension. In religious usage it is whatever pleases God through submission, compliance, and avoidance, including all law. IBNASHUR-FULL (الرازي): Al-Razi says worship means honoring God's commands and caring for creation, the shared purpose of revealed laws despite their differing forms and details. TABATABAI (author): A servant is a human or any conscious being in a state of ownership; worship is setting oneself in the position of one's Lord's possession. TABATABAI (author): Worship differs from mere humility in grammar and meaning: the lexicographer's account of servitude as submission captures an implication, since worship takes a direct object while submission takes li. TABATABAI (author): Worship is incompatible with arrogance but can be shared, as shown by the prohibition on associating another in worship; arrogance, by contrast, cannot coexist with worship. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (روح المعاني): Since worship is unavoidably obligatory for servants, it is more deserving of precedence than seeking aid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (التفسير القيم): Putting worship before seeking aid follows the rule that ends precede means: worship is the end and aid its instrument. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship is God’s due, whereas seeking aid is the servant’s request; offering submission first is fitting before asking for something. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (روح المعاني): Worship is more apt beside the mention of recompense, and seeking aid joins more closely to the request for guidance. STUDYQURAN (author): Some define true servitude as maximal humility and self-effacement; it acknowledges human poverty and reliance on God (47:38)."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p2", "position": "Worship means affirming God's oneness.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (علي وابن عباس في آخرين): One interpretation of worship is affirming God's oneness, reported from ʿAlī and Ibn ʿAbbās among others. RAZI-FULL (author): The familiar remembrance combines glorification, praise, monotheism, divine greatness, and dependence; “praise belongs to God” already entails glorifying Him because only the perfect can perfect others. RAZI-FULL (author): Naming God before the act prevents the devil from claiming the worship was directed to idols, celestial bodies, or another object; the order makes monotheism explicit. RAZI-FULL (author): After establishing God's oneness, God commands Moses to worship Him: monotheism is the root or tree, and servitude its branch or fruit; neither stands without the other. ABUHAYYAN (author): Worship is also explained as affirming God's oneness, as in the statement that jinn and humankind were created only to worship. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Worship is a noble station: scripture applies servant to prophets and places worship after monotheism, since worship follows the foundation of divine unity. BURHAN (القاضي أبو بكر بن العربي): Ibn al-ʿArabī groups the Qurʾān’s core subjects into monotheism, reminder—i
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
