<<chunk 39, part 3 of 0..5>>
L (author): Among lower composite bodies, polytheists worship mineral idols of stone, gold, or silver, a particular tree, the calf, or humans claimed to be God's son, such as Ezra and Christ. RAZI-FULL (author): The Magians worship fire, which Rāzī classifies among simple lower bodies. RAZI-FULL (author): The Ṣābiʾa and most astrologers worship the sun, moon, and other stars and attribute fortune and misfortune to them. RAZI-FULL (author): Because divine power, knowledge, generosity, and forbearance are certain while natural, astral, or mental causes may also be effects of God's power, only God is certainly worthy of worship. RAZI-FULL (author): Although servitude is lowly, service to the highest and most excellent Lord is most fitting; God's superior power, knowledge, and generosity make His worship preferable to any rival's. RAZI-FULL (author): God's extraordinary acts—holding the sky, moving celestial bodies, producing lightning, wind and rain, bringing water from stone and ice from water, and raising or lowering mountains and people—show why no created thing can share His worship. RAZI-FULL (author): When satanic laziness or heedlessness arises, recalling God's presence restores insight and readiness for worship, as 7:201 describes the God-conscious remembering and seeing clearly. RAZI-FULL (author): An Arab leaves his camel outside, fulfills worship calmly, and asks God to return His trust; after the camel is stolen, its injured robber returns it, illustrating God's preservation of the worshiper's trust. RAZI-FULL (author): Help from any intermediary itself depends on God's help, so the worshiper should cut out that intermediary and ask God directly. QURTUBI (author): A responsible speaker’s recitation affirms God’s lordship and realizes worship of God, since other people worship idols and other objects instead. ABUHAYYAN (ابن السكيت): Ibn al-Sikkīt gives tajrīd, stripping or devotion, as an alternative meaning of worship. ABUHAYYAN (author): Joining worship to seeking help combines what the servant offers God with what the servant asks from Him. SAMIN-DURR (طرفة): Ṭarafa's line uses muʿabbad for a road, illustrating the sense of a road trodden smooth. BURHAN (author): The supplicatory meaning of “we ask for help” is “help us in Your worship.” BIQAI (author): The phrase guides people toward worshipping God. ITQAN (author): Sequence can mark causation: worship brings aid, repentance brings purification, slander causes sin, and the gaze can lead to sexual desire. ALUSI (author): In al-Ālūsī’s Sufi progression, the wayfarer reaches the station of true servitude at this clause after praise, remembrance, recognition of divine favor, and longing for release from attachment to other things. ALUSI-FULL (author): Offering what the Master requires before asking what one wants from Him better demonstrates sincere servitude. ALUSI-FULL (author): Because worship belongs to the ever-present God, while praise can remain complete in His absence, each section receives the style suited to it; Abraham rejects what sets. ALUSI-FULL (author): The worshipper imitates the faithful community in its speech and hopes that joining its worship will count him among the righteous. ALUSI-FULL (author): Another explanation says a single object might imply that worship only draws one near when combined with asking assistance, which is not true. ELMALILI (author): Wanting to rise admits one's own need and the value of a higher state, which worship recognizes most fully. ELMALILI (امام فخرالدین رازی): Razi includes worshippers of fire, the sun, moon, stars, and astrologers who attribute fortune and misfortune to the stars, as well as Manichaean light-and-dark dualists. ELMALILI (author): Elmalılı renders the verse as worshipping and serving God alone and seeking aid and care from Him alone. ELMALILI (author): Every worship act is both qurbat and taat, and every qurbat is taat, but the reverse implications do not hold. ELMALILI (author): He seeks refuge in God's grace and guidance and asks for mercy because he has failed to worship adequately. IBNASHUR (author): Many Arabs combined worship of God with idols or celestial bodies; named tribes worshipped the sun, moon, Sirius, Aldebaran, or Pleiades, treating these beings as intermediaries and thus as sources of help. IBNASHUR-FULL (عز الدين بن عبد السلام): Ibn Abd al-Salam divides the path to God into outward bodily practice (Sharia) and inward heart practice (Haqiqa), both aiming at servitude as required of the responsible person. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The declaration of worship frees the supplicant from denial and idolatry. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The indirect rebuke fits those who worship celestial bodies, animals, idols, or other gods and seek their aid as intermediaries to God. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): God’s right in worship takes precedence over the servant’s share in seeking aid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship suits mention of recompense, while seeking aid fits the ensuing request for guidance; each expression is placed beside what suits it."}, {"id": "1:5/q07/p3", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: worship embraces commanded acts and is owed to god for his lordship and gifts.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The author rejects defining worship simply as obedience: obeying a parent or master does not itself make a person their worshiper, and idolaters worship without receiving commands from idols. ELMALILI (author): Turkish tapmak and tapınmak suggest indiscriminate or unconscious obedience and are associated with idols and the cross, so translating worship that way debases the language; kulluk is more aware but weaker than worship."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q08", "question": "What motivates worship and how are its levels ranked?", "turns_on": "Whether hope and fear, honor, love, gratitude, or God's intrinsic worth is the proper motive", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q08/p1", "position": "Worship for reward or from fear is practiced and differently ranked.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أهل التحقيق): The first rank worships for reward or to avoid punishment; Rāzī calls it very low because it treats God as a means to a worldly or created goal. ALUSI (author): The prayer formula must express worship of God Himself; al-Ālūsī says a prayer would be invalid if its intention were merely to gain reward or the honor of worshipping Him. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī gives eleven reasons for putting worship before seeking aid: its status as a trust, its priority to requests, obligation, relation to reward and guidance, rhetorical cadence, and the spiritual progression of the worshipper. ALUSI-FULL (بعض المحققين): A scholar distinguishes three levels: worship from hope or fear, devotion through honor or accepting duties, and pure service recognizing God's intrinsic right; the first is spiritually lowest and the last highest. ALUSI-FULL (author): Prayer would be invalid if the worshipper explicitly prayed for reward or the prestige of worship, since its intention must be directed to God Himself. ELMALILI (author): The soul's attachment to an ultimate source of hope and fear is the origin of the innate ideas of worship and the object of worship, and moral character and future fortune depend on its seriousness. ELMALILI (author): Worship belongs to God alone; worshippers who serve Him are not wholly captured by other hopes and fears and can remain steady in their duties. ELMALILI (e‘âzım-ı müfessirîn): The great exegetes paraphrase worship as bowing and humbling oneself only to God, finding tranquility through obedience because He alone is the source of all fear and hope. IBNASHUR (الفخر): Fakhr al-Din ranks worship for reward or fear as lowest, worship for the honor of serving God as higher but incomplete, and worship because God alone deserves it as the highest station, servitude. IBNASHUR (ابن سينا): Ibn Sina describes the highest station as seeking God for no other end, serving Him because He deserves worship and because relation to Him is noble, without hope or fear. IBNASHUR (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Asked why he exerted himself in worship after God had forgiven his past and future sins, the Prophet replied, ‘Should I not be a grateful servant?’; the author sees this as the highest station without hope of more reward. IBNASHUR (author): Some peoples worshipped from fear alone to avert harm: examples include some devil worshippers and Manichaeans, who worshipped Ahriman as lord of evil and harm. IBNASHUR-FULL (الفخر): Fakhr al-Razi ranks worship for reward or fear as low, worship for the honor of belonging to God as intermediate, and worship because God alone deserves it as highest, calling the last servitude. IBNASHUR-FULL (رسول الله): Asked why he labored in worship after forgiveness, the Prophet answered that he should be a grateful servant; Ibn Ashur cites this as worship motivated by gratitude, not hope or fear. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Worship arises from reverence through love or fear; love is higher because it pleases the worshipper and entails fear of displeasing the beloved, as the cited poems and 3:31 express. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Love-based worship underlies revealed religions and even idolaters' devotion to their gods; some instead worship from fear alone, such as Manicheans who worship Ahriman to avert harm. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن سينا): Ibn Sina explains that people need one another, so justice must be maintained by revealed law and a rightful lawgiver; knowledge of the one who rewards good and evil needs repeated worship to preserve it. TABATABAI (author): Worship that shares attention with idols, other aims, Paradise as a bargain, or fear of Hell is shirk; sincere religion belongs to God alone. TABATABAI (الصادق): Al-Sadiq distinguishes worship from fear, which is servitude, and reward-seeking, which is hired labor; worship from love is free worship and best. TABATABAI (علي): Ali describes worship from desire as merchants' worship, fear as slaves' worship, and gratitude as free peopl
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
