<<chunk 39, part 5 of 0..5>>
or reward, unlike those ignorant of His presence. CORPUSCORANICUM (author): The double first-person plural declaration explicitly makes the text a community prayer, reversing the usual sura pattern of God speaking to the Prophet or his community. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The plural we marks believers as a community bound by faith and worship, balancing person and society; they help one another while knowing every blessing ultimately comes from God. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The plural verbs signal Islam’s communal character, reflected in congregational prayer, mosques, pilgrimage, charity, jihad, shared fasting and feasts, and visiting the sick. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Islam’s communal practices include pilgrimage, social solidarity through alms, collective jihad, and fasting and feast days binding the Muslim community. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The plural form of worship and seeking aid extends the supplication beyond the speaker to all believers, as the author’s cited views explain. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The plural nūn encourages a person to perform prayer in congregation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Because believers are siblings, saying we worship includes all believers across the world and seeks the Muslims’ common good. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (فتح القدير): The plural verbs let the supplicant speak for himself and the wider class of worshippers. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Guide us matches we worship and we seek aid: once the speaker includes companions in worship, he asks guidance for all, needed to reach their aim. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): Invoking the congregation’s mercy, the worshipper praises, worships, seeks help, asks guidance, follows the righteous, and flees the rejected as a group. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The plural نعبد ونستعين emphasizes communal life: congregational prayer, pilgrimage, charity, jihad, festivals, fasting, and believers' shared brotherhood; it includes the speaker among them."}, {"id": "1:5/q09/p2", "position": "The plural voices humility by joining others' worship.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The plural “we worship” is humbler than “I worship”: it presents the speaker as one servant among God's servants rather than as a self-important individual. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī asks whether the nūn in “we worship” is plural or divine majesty, since attributing greatness to oneself seems unfitting during humble worship; he says each answer has wisdom. ALUSI (قيل): One explanation for saying we worship rather than I worship is humility: the speaker’s own service is too deficient to cite alone, so he joins it with the worship of all worshippers. ALUSI (قيل): A third explanation says the plural presents the speaker humbly as one among God’s servants, unlike the singular claim to be the worshipper; al-Ālūsī illustrates the contrast with Ishmael and Moses. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): The plural naʿbudu can humbly join one's deficient worship to that of all worshippers instead of presenting one's own worship as worthy of mention. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): A further explanation hears the plural as saying that the speaker is one servant among God's servants; a humble collective identity is contrasted with the singular claims of Ishmael and Moses. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (فتح القدير): Another view takes the plural as humility: the individual is too small for this great occasion, rather than as self-exaltation."}, {"id": "1:5/q09/p3", "position": "The 'we' includes the worshipper and angels or congregants.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): In congregational prayer “we” means the worshipers together; when praying alone it includes the worshiper and the angels who join him in worship. BAYDAWI (author): The implicit “we” may include reciter, guardian angels, and those at congregational prayer, or all monotheists; sharing their worship and need seeks acceptance through their blessing and explains communal prayer. DURR-FULL (أبو طلحة): In battle, Abu Talha heard the Prophet recite “Master of Judgment, You alone we worship and seek help”; he saw men fall as angels struck them from front and behind. ELMALILI (author): Saying “we worship” makes the individual represent those he feels as brothers, beginning with guardian angels and extending to present or envisaged congregations. ELMALILI (author): If no actual worshipping congregation suffices, a Muslim should mentally join the existing congregation to the potential one, including God's angels."}, {"id": "1:5/q09/p4", "position": "The plural gathers the person's inward and bodily faculties.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (الشيخ الأكبر): Ibn Arabi explains the plural as gathering the human person's subtle center with its body and parts, each of which owes fitting worship to God. ELMALILI (author): A congregation is not a mere crowd but an organized body able to act with one spirit, formed through a shared social covenant, so there is no true circularity in the verse. ELMALILI (author): The verse renews a witnessed testimony that there is no deity besides God and a commitment to act on it; collective Qur'anic pledges can distribute rights and duties to every individual (an individual obligation) or assign them to the collective body (a communal obligation)."}, {"id": "1:5/q09/p5", "position": "The plural expresses the worshipper's honor.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The nūn of majesty portrays God's servants together as His subjects, whose service makes them rulers of this world and the next. IBNKATHIR (بعضهم): Another explanation allows a plural of honor: the servant is noble while worshipping, but should not claim collective standing outside worship because everyone depends on God."}, {"id": "1:5/q09/p6", "position": "The plural speaks for the worshipping community.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR (بعضهم): A third view says we is more humble than I worship because the singular could imply that one person alone can fully worship or properly praise God."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
