<<chunk 39, part 4 of 0..5>>
e's worship. TABATABAI (الصادق): Al-Sadiq says reward-seeking is the worship of the greedy, fear of Hell the worship of slaves, and loving God the worship of the noble; one who loves God is loved and made secure. STUDYQURAN (Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq): Jaʿfar distinguishes worship from fear, for reward, and from love; worship out of love is free worship and most excellent."}, {"id": "1:5/q08/p2", "position": "Worship from love or gratitude is a high form of service.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The servant's continuing approach through supererogatory worship until God loves him illustrates the state of being absorbed in God's presence. RAZI-FULL (author): The spiritual ascent rises through human spirits, the spirits of the heavens, angels, throne-bearers, and pure spirits detached from bodies, whose worship and love of God exceed human comprehension. IBNASHUR (author): Most nations’ worship, including worship prescribed in revealed laws, is founded on love of God; polytheists likewise love their idols as they love God, as 2:165 says. TABATABAI (author): Love and gratitude in these reports converge: gratitude places a gift where it belongs, and worship belongs to God for His own perfection and beauty, which is inherently lovable."}, {"id": "1:5/q08/p3", "position": "Worship for God's own worth is ranked highest.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (بعضهم): Some authorities rank servitude above prophethood because servitude turns from people toward God and withdraws from managing affairs, while a messenger turns from God toward people and manages their needs. IBNASHUR (author): The author identifies Ibn Sina’s God-directed devotion with Fakhr’s highest station of servitude, treating its two stated motives as one state."}, {"id": "1:5/q08/p4", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: worship for reward or from fear is practiced and differently ranked.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR (آخرون): Others rebut the Sufi criticism: worship directed to God can still seek reward and protection from punishment, as the Prophet affirms to a Bedouin asking for Paradise and refuge from Hell. IBNASHUR (author): The author rejects Fakhr’s dismissal of reward-and-fear worship as a low, fallen grade: Islam itself teaches it, most believers practice it, and it is the aim of obligation; higher stations are rare and even the devout still hope and fear."}, {"id": "1:5/q08/p5", "position": "Worship has differing motives and levels.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أهل التحقيق): The second rank worships to gain honor through service, accepted duties, or affiliation with God; it is higher but incomplete because its real aim remains something other than God. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī then quotes a prayer exalting servitude as honor and recognizing God as Lord."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q09", "question": "Whom does the plural 'we' include, and why use it?", "turns_on": "Whether it represents the reciter, congregation, angels, all believers, or an inward plurality, and what humility or community it expresses", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q09/p1", "position": "The 'we' represents the community of believers.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Saying “You alone we worship” is a believer's confession of God's lordship, submission, and true worship, in contrast to those who worship idols. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): We seek God's help in all our affairs; this is also a repudiation of idols. RAZI (author): To fulfill “You alone we worship,” one must then detail all commands and prohibitions; the religious law books cover the obligations of the present dispensation. RAZI (author): All these fields of law, worship, ethics and governance fall under “You alone we worship”; the verse contains an ocean of questions that human reason reaches only slightly. RAZI-FULL (author): The preceding taxonomy concludes that “You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help” functions as the confession “There is no deity but God.” RAZI-FULL (author): To explain the plural nūn, Rāzī cites a report that the first congregational takbīr is worth more than the world and all it contains. RAZI-FULL (author): The great reward for congregational prayer does not justify harming Muslims with garlic or onion odor, much less by slander, backbiting, or denunciation. RAZI-FULL (author): The plural also includes all believers across east and west, so the worshiper seeks the welfare of fellow Muslims as well as his own. RAZI-FULL (author): Saying “we worship You” would not exclude worship of others, as polytheists do; saying “You alone we worship” clearly denies every rival. BAYDAWI (author): Another analysis takes the conjunction as circumstantial: “We worship You while seeking Your help.” BAYDAWI (author): Kasra on both nūns follows Tamim dialect, which kasras imperfect prefixes other than yāʾ if the following vowel is not ḍamma. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The speaker includes himself among worshippers to seek acceptance and response through their blessing, which helps explain the institution of congregational prayer. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The conjunction may instead express circumstance: “we worship You while seeking Your help.” ABUHAYYAN (author): After praising God for lordship, mercy, and kingship in 1:2–4, the speaker turns to address Him and says that he and others worship and submit to Him. ABUHAYYAN (author): The first-person plural nūn includes the speaker and others, just as the preceding praise encompasses all who praise. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عمرو بن عبيد): In an anomalous count, ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd treats “You alone we worship” as a verse, giving eight verses. IBNKATHIR (author): One explanation of the plural nūn is that the speaker represents the whole class of worshippers, including fellow believers, especially in congregational prayer or when leading them. BIQAI (الحرالي): The first-person plural nūn in naʿbudu signals that prayer is founded on congregational worship. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Whoever asks God for aid with a genuine task receives help proportionate to it; failure comes from neglecting God's due, misunderstanding the verse or forgetting its favor, and the plural nun signals congregational prayer. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says “You alone we worship” indicates God's oneness. BURSEVI (جبريل عليه السلام): Ibn Abbas reports that Gabriel told the Prophet to understand You alone we worship as placing hope in God alone. BURSEVI (author): This collective form helps explain why congregational prayer was prescribed: the individual folds his worship and need into the community's. ALUSI (قيل): Another explanation is that the singular would falsely claim personal devotion despite worldly submission and dependence; the plural lets the speaker include exemplary saints and the devout. ALUSI (قيل): By joining the plural voice of the devout, a worshipper imitates them and hopes to be counted among their company; the source cites a couplet on imitating the noble. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): Another explanation says the singular would risk a false claim of exclusive devotion, since people often submit to worldly powers and seek help from powerless creatures; the plural can include the righteous. ELMALILI (author): The plural 'we worship / we ask help' gives social community special importance, since the pledge is not expressed in the singular. ELMALILI (author): At the center of the Fatiha, speech and the covenant are voiced through the collective conscience and worshipful tongue, pointing to conscience as a locus for divine speech. ELMALILI (author): As like-minded individuals meet, an actual congregation forms readily and follows an imam; its collective power corresponds to that imam. ELMALILI (author): God trains and strengthens social feeling by taking a covenant from each rational individual in the plural, so each represents all humanity and the worlds. ELMALILI (author): The first-person plural is grammatically spoken by one individual who represents fellow believers; a congregation speaks through a representative rather than each member saying “I.” ELMALILI (author): Communities sincerely following the Prophet's Sunna can collectively uphold the covenant, submit to no one besides God, and seek aid from no one else; this spirit drove early Islamic conquests and expansion. ELMALILI (author): Replacing the plural with singular wording in prayer invalidates it because God requires a communal conscience covenant, not an individual-only promise; worshippers should consider whom they represent and on whose behalf they seek aid. ELMALILI (author): Here the individual sense is retained: each believer bears the individual obligation, while collective testimony is the aggregate of individual testimony; the two consciences mutually guarantee one another. ELMALILI (author): After the covenant, the prayer for guidance begins as the most comprehensive practical application of seeking divine aid; it answers the worshipper's need, after pausing at “we seek aid,” to know where and how to begin. IBNASHUR (author): The plural ‘we’ in worship and seeking help includes the reciter with the community of believers; it displays their collective strength to polytheists and makes their shared praise more eloquent than an individual’s testimony. IBNASHUR (author): The plural worshippers’ testimony itself praises God: the speaker moving from praise to intimate address takes every chance to show that many recognize the praised one’s merit. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): “You alone we worship” gathers the meaning of religion and sacred law, while “You alone we ask for help” gathers sincerity in deeds. IBNASHUR-FULL (عز الدين بن عبد السلام): Ibn Abd al-Salam identifies “You alone we worship” with Sharia and “You alone we ask for help” with Haqiqa. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Placed first by the Prophet's instruction, al-Fatiha trains readers in inner purification through its supplication from “You alone we worship” onward. TABATABAI (الصادق): A report through a general transmission from al-Sadiq reads You alone we worship as seeking only God, without a substitute 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
