<<chunk 39, part 2 of 0..5>>
d the ordering are debated. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p10", "position": "Worship is exclusive humble obedience and help is sought from God.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author or reported authority): Worship is exclusive humble obedience and help is sought from God. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author or reported authority): Worship is exclusive humble obedience and help is sought from God."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p11", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: worship fundamentally means humility and submission.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Claiming to have risen already falsely treats progress as finite and decline as impossible; ascent is limitless and the danger of falling remains, so worship is pride's remedy."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p12", "position": "Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p13", "position": "Worship is obedience with submission, and aid is sought from God.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-QT (author or reported authority): Worship is obedience with submission, and aid is sought from God."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q06", "question": "How is نَعْبُدُ read and parsed?", "turns_on": "The form of the verb, including person, voice, prefix and final consonant", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q06/p1", "position": "The initial nūn is read with kasra.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (الأعمش وابن وثاب والنخعي): Al-Aʿmash, Ibn Waththab, and al-Nakhaʿi read نستعين with kasra on its initial nūn, a dialect of some Quraysh in certain augmented verbs. ABUHAYYAN (أبو جعفر الطوسي): Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī identifies the kasra on the initial nūn as the dialect of Hudhayl. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عبيد بن عمير الليثي، وزر بن حبيش، ويحيى بن وثاب، والنخعي، والأعمش): These readers use kasra on the nūn, a dialect attributed to Qays, Tamīm, Asad, and Rabīʿa; al-Ṭūsī attributes it to Hudhayl. ALUSI (بعضهم): Some also read yaʿlamūn with a kasra on the imperfect prefix. ALUSI-FULL (عبيد بن عمير الليثي وزيد بن حبيش ويحيى بن وثاب والنخعي): They read naʿbudu with kasra on the initial nūn, a dialect found among Qays, Tamim, Asad, Rabīʿa, and Hudhayl; the same pattern applies to nastaʿīn."}, {"id": "1:5/q06/p2", "position": "A third-person passive form is reported.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (author): The passive reading iyyāka yuʿbadu seems to lack a governor for the accusative pronoun; Abū Ḥayyān explains it as a metaphorical substitution of nominative anta, followed by an unusual shift to third person. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The passive reading iyyāka yuʿbadu is grammatically difficult because iyyāka is accusative; Abū Ḥayyān explains it through metaphorical pronoun substitution and an internal shift. ALUSI (الحسن وابن المتوكل وأبو محلف): Al-Ḥasan, Ibn al-Mutawakkil, and Abū Miḥlaf read yuʿbadu in the passive; al-Ālūsī calls this unusual. ALUSI-FULL (الحسن وإبن المتوكل وأبو محلف): They read yuʿbadu in the passive, an unusual form."}, {"id": "1:5/q06/p3", "position": "The familiar active form is read.", "reasons": "DURR (علي): Abu Razin says Ali read the worship and help clauses, followed by ihdina, in the raised form; he characterizes Ali as a fluent Qurayshi Arab. ALUSI (الجمهور): The majority read naʿbudu with an open nūn and a ḍamma on the dāl; al-Ālūsī identifies this as the eloquent Hijazi form."}, {"id": "1:5/q06/p4", "position": "The final dāl is read without a vowel.", "reasons": "ALUSI (بعض أهل مكة): Some people of Mecca read naʿbud with a quiescent dāl."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q07", "question": "What does worship require and why is it owed to God?", "turns_on": "The grounds, scope, and conditions of worship in the notes", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q07/p1", "position": "Worship embraces commanded acts and is owed to God for His lordship and gifts.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The prayer seeks help for future worship, and asking remains fitting under obligation because the servant shows dependence; prayer may also be needed before God grants a further grace. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): A second meaning is obedience, as in the command not to worship Satan in Yā Sīn 36:60. RAZI (author): Worship requires proving that the world has one God, able to do all possible things, knowing all knowable things, and free of need; He commands and forbids, so creatures must obey and submit. RAZI (author): The obligations encompassed by worship also include those God revealed through earlier prophets and those He assigned to the angels in heaven from their creation. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship and seeking aid concern carrying out the whole range of religious obligations. RAZI-FULL (author): The law, path, and reality complete human ascent: worship, reliance on God, and guidance culminate in fellowship with the pure and distance from the wretched. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship presupposes proof that the world has one God, with unlimited power and knowledge and no needs, who commands and forbids and must be obeyed. RAZI-FULL (author): God alone deserves worship because ultimate reverence belongs only to the source of greatest benefaction: life and the creation of what sustains life, both traced to God. RAZI-FULL (author): Everything contingent is needy and occupied with its own needs, so only the self-sufficient God can meet the needs of others and deserves their worship. RAZI-FULL (author): Calling Muhammad God's servant at the supreme Ascension shows servitude's honor; some say it exceeds prophethood because it turns from creation to God, while prophethood turns back to people and their affairs. RAZI-FULL (author): Jesus first calls himself God's servant; that declaration vindicates his mother, brings good and averts harm, and precedes God's raising him, so sustained practical servitude deserves hope of Paradise. RAZI-FULL (author): Calling the Fatiha “prayer” shows that religious law serves human interests: people most need knowledge of God's lordship and servitude, which the surah's two halves provide to fulfill the covenant. ABUHAYYAN (author): Worship can also mean obedience, as in the command not to worship Satan. ABUHAYYAN (author): Some interpret worship here as drawing near to God through obedience. SAMIN-DURR (author): Neither verb names an object, allowing the wording to encompass every object of worship or aid, or to focus on performing the acts without regard to an object. IBNKATHIR (قتادة): Qatadah says God commands His servants to devote worship sincerely to Him and seek His help for their affairs. IBNKATHIR (بعضهم): Some argue that servanthood is nobler than messengerhood because worship proceeds from creation to God, while the messenger's mission proceeds from God to creation; Ibn Kathir rejects the claim and its reasoning. IBNKATHIR (author): Worship and reliance recur together elsewhere in the Qur'an, including commands to worship God and trust Him. BIQAI-FULL (مسعود التفتازاني): Al-Taftazani maps the Fatiha's blessings to two creations and two preservations: creation in Rabb al-alamin, preservation in mercy, second creation in judgment, and afterlife preservation in worship onward. ITQAN (author): The Fatiha points to all major Qur’anic disciplines: knowledge of God and attributes, prophecy, resurrection, worship, ethical conduct and the straight path, and stories teaching the outcomes of obedience and disobedience. ITQAN (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says the Fatiha encompasses praise, worship through commands and prohibitions, and promise and warning; every Qur’anic verse falls under one of these topics. ITQAN (ابن أبي جمرة): Commentary on the verse requires explaining God’s majesty, worship, its forms and performance, the worshipper’s qualities, and the nature and manner of seeking aid. ALUSI (author): Only God may rightly receive worship, in law and reason, because He grants the greatest blessings, beginning with life and existence and all that follows from them. ALUSI (author): Worship can mean obedience, as in the command not to worship Satan. ELMALILI (author): The imagined worshipper pledges freedom from all but God, obedience to His commands, moral effort, and even sacrifice of life and worlds in God's path. IBNASHUR (الرازي): Al-Razi’s explanation of worship in 51:56 encompasses compliance with the whole body of religious law. IBNASHUR (ابن سينا): Ibn Sina explains that human interdependence requires exchange, justice, and a divinely prescribed law; a lawgiver and just recompense require knowledge of God, preserved by repeated worship. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The worship clause represents the Qur'an's commands and prohibitions; the path clause represents promise and warning. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): A third explanation of Umm al-Qur'an is that it contains the Qur'an's theoretical wisdom and practical rulings, including theology, prophecy, admonition, worship, transactions, morals, and law. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Worship trains individual and social perfection: it recalls God and recompense, disciplines the self, sustains just relations, and keeps thought on the Creator; this explains the purpose of creation stated in 51:56. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Leaving the object of seeking aid unstated makes the request cover every worldly and otherworldly need, not only worship or obedience. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The ordering parallels the command to worship God and then rely on Him. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The servant’s deeds require worship and recognition that he cannot perform it without God’s aid."}, {"id": "1:5/q07/p2", "position": "Worship encompasses devoted action owed to God.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): As the servant ceases serving rulers and relying on them for wealth or rank, he turns instead to worshipping God and seeking guidance and knowledge from Him. RAZI-FUL
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
