<<chunk 39, part 1 of 0..5>>
ncluding promise, warning, Paradise, Hell, and purification—and rulings, including duties and commands. BURHAN (author): The claim that Sūrat al-Ikhlāṣ equals a third of the Qurʾān is explained either as a reward granted by God or as a meaning-based division, since it contains monotheism. BIQAI-FULL (author): Al-Baqara is also called the Radiant and the Hump: it illuminates guidance and sufficiency, brightens believers' faces at judgment, and exalts belief in the afterlife above every other good after monotheism. DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses worship as affirming God's oneness, fearing and hoping in Him as Lord, and worshipping no other. BURSEVI (عكرمة): Ikrima says worship wherever used in the Qur'an means monotheism, tasbih means prayer, and qunut means obedience. ALUSI (author): Worship may mean affirming divine oneness, as in the stated purpose for creating jinn and humankind. ALUSI-FULL (author): The early explicit focus on God strengthens monotheism and guards against distraction, satanic whispering, and the thought that worship might be meant for someone else. ELMALILI (author): The verse is pure monotheism and rejects every form of associating partners with God. MUQATIL (author or reported authority): Worship affirms God's oneness; the servant asks help for worship, and a report divides the sūra between God and the servant."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p3", "position": "Worship includes love or reverence with submission.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): Worship is the highest gratitude: utmost submission joined with utmost reverence, owed only to God as giver of life's foundational blessings. RAZI (author): Worship is performing an act that has been commanded, out of reverence for the commander. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship is performing an act commanded by the one obeyed, out of reverence for that commander. IBNKATHIR (author): In ordinary language ʿibādah is rooted in humility, as in a subdued road or camel; in religious usage it combines complete love, submission, and fear. ALUSI (قيل): Since worship is harder than praise, placing it in the language of presence helps the lover perform it energetically and without weariness; a poem pictures the beloved seeing and hearing. ALUSI-FULL (author): Because worship is demanding, the beloved's presence gives the servant energy to endure hardship without fatigue, as illustrated by a poetic appeal to sing before Saʿdā. ELMALILI (author): Worship is obedient action born from the collision of supreme love and fear, seeking ascent from total helplessness to absolute power and seeking tranquility through ultimate humility and reverence. ELMALILI (author): Humility and reverence toward God provide the highest possible elevation for the human conscience through affiliation with Him. ELMALILI (author): Narrowness of conscience accompanies ignorance and pride, while an expanded conscience accompanies elevated understanding, humility, mercy, patience, and forbearance; the narrow-hearted person loves and fears only himself. ELMALILI (author): Ubudet is the broadest term, while ibadat is narrower; ubudiyet displays humility and ibadat expresses its strongest form, including awe and reverence. IBNASHUR (author): Worship ordinarily denotes an act of submission or reverence exceeding what is customary between people; using it for obedience alone is metaphorical. IBNASHUR (author): In religious usage worship is doing what pleases the Lord through submission, compliance, and avoidance, or a morally accountable person’s action against personal desire in reverence for God. IBNASHUR (author): Worship is driven by reverence, either from love or bare fear; love is more important because it pleases the worshipper, and it entails fearing the beloved’s displeasure. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Worship combines love, fear, and submission; it is humanity’s purpose but remains a free choice under life’s test, and worldly gifts are means for serving God rather than ends."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p4", "position": "Worship can mean supplication.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): A third meaning is supplication, as in the warning about those too proud to worship God in Ghāfir 40:60. ABUHAYYAN (author): Worship is also interpreted as supplication, as in the warning against those who disdain worship. ABUHAYYAN (author): The meanings offered for worship—humility, obedience, drawing near, supplication, and affirming oneness—are close in sense. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): Most interpret worship as submission and humility; other contextual senses include obedience, drawing near through obedience, supplication, and affirmation of divine unity. BIQAI-FULL (author): The Fatiha is a treasure, cure, sufficiency, fulfillment, protection and incantation; it gathers praise, gratitude and supplication, with prayer as their greatest assembly. ITQAN (author): The worshippers speak this supplication; an implied “say” can be supplied, as with the two earlier human utterances, unlike Gabriel’s and the angels’ speech. ITQAN (author): Declarative form can express supplication: ask for help, curse Abu Lahab, or invoke ruin and a curse on others. ALUSI (author): Worship can also mean supplication, as in the warning against those who are too proud to worship God. ALUSI (author): These senses of worship—submission, obedience, supplication, and affirming oneness—are close in meaning. ALUSI-FULL (author): Names nine through thirteen include al-Hamd, al-Shukr, al-Duʿa, Taʿlim al-Masʾala, and al-Suʾal, reflecting praise, gratitude, supplication, and asking. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi finds the claim that the surah contains supplication or asking more difficult than the claim about gratitude; it begins with praise before the request. ALUSI-FULL (author): Worship may mean submission, obedience, supplication, or affirming God's oneness; the meanings are close, and references to worshipping idols report the opponents' claim sarcastically. ALUSI-FULL (author): A structural explanation takes the first part as praise, naturally spoken about God, and the remainder as supplication, naturally spoken in His presence. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship belongs to the God-praising half of the surah, whereas the servant’s request for aid belongs with the supplication beginning guide us."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p5", "position": "Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses.", "reasons": "MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses. MAWARDI-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship is variously submission, obedience, or nearness through obedience; submission is preferred, and iyyāka has competing analyses."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p6", "position": "Worship can mean drawing near through obedience.", "reasons": "ALUSI (author): Worship is a means of drawing near to God, whereas seeking aid is not; the more important act therefore comes first. ELMALILI (author): In legal usage, worship is a special act of obedience that earns reward, depends on intention, and expresses nearness to God. ELMALILI (author): Legal worship is conscious obedience and nearness directed only to God through the person's whole spiritual and bodily, outward and inward existence."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p7", "position": "Ibn ʿAbbās and Qatāda gloss exclusive worship and help for obedience and all affairs.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author or reported authority): Ibn ʿAbbās and Qatāda gloss exclusive worship and help for obedience and all affairs. IBNABIHATIM (author or reported authority): Ibn ʿAbbās and Qatāda gloss exclusive worship and help for obedience and all affairs. IBNABIHATIM (author or reported authority): Ibn ʿAbbās and Qatāda gloss exclusive worship and help for obedience and all affairs. IBNABIHATIM (author or reported authority): Ibn ʿAbbās and Qatāda gloss exclusive worship and help for obedience and all affairs."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p8", "position": "Worship means submission and abasement, while Ibn ʿAbbās reports unity, fear, and hope.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship means submission and abasement, while Ibn ʿAbbās reports unity, fear, and hope. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship means submission and abasement, while Ibn ʿAbbās reports unity, fear, and hope. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Worship means submission and abasement, while Ibn ʿAbbās reports unity, fear, and hope."}, {"id": "1:5/q05/p9", "position": "Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor an
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
