<<chunk 40, part 2 of 0..5>>
r encourage action; the latter are not required for liability. ALUSI-FULL (ناصر الملة والدين البيضاوي): Al-Bayḍāwī distinguishes necessary assistance, without which action cannot occur, from nonessential help that makes an already possible act easier; neither category entails compulsion or denies capacity. ELMALILI (Beyzâvî): Beydawi distinguishes necessary aid, without which an act cannot occur, from nonessential aid that makes it easier; necessary aid includes ability, conception, instruments, and material. ELMALILI (author): Legal theory calls these two kinds of aid enabling power and facilitating power. IBNASHUR (author): Nonessential aid provides something that eases an act, such as arranging a mount for someone able to walk; together with necessary aid it completes tawfīq, creating capacity and the impulse to obey. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Scholars divide divine aid into essential capacity and means required for an act, and additional facilitation; the latter is sometimes called tawfiq, which with capacity means creating ability and desire to obey."}, {"id": "1:5/q13/p4", "position": "Divine aid enables or facilitates action.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī's second proof begins by mapping God's names to the servant's past: God brought him from nonexistence, death, incapacity, and ignorance into being, life, ability, and knowledge. BAYDAWI (author): Nonessential help makes an act easier or motivates it, like a mount for one able to walk; it is not required for valid moral responsibility. BIQAI (author): The verse teaches believers to acknowledge incapacity, feel their need, and rely on God's power; this directs their desires toward asking Him for guidance on the straight path. ELMALILI (author): The limits of understanding human willing reflect our inability to comprehend God's reality. ELMALILI (author): Human life is an exchange between inner and outer conditions, many of whose causes lie outside us or were not chosen by us; this makes each person sense their own incapacity. ELMALILI (author): Human hearing, speech, and ability to make others love depend on God's enabling; Elmalılı says he cannot do these without God."}, {"id": "1:5/q13/p5", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: aid includes the capacity and conditions necessary for action.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The author rejects using this prayer to prove that ability coincides with the act: one may ask for unprovided divine favors that strengthen motivation and ease obedience. ALUSI (author): On al-Bayḍāwī’s distinction, neither faction can use this verse to establish its doctrine: necessary aid permits action and liability, while helpful extras merely ease action. ALUSI (الجبرية): Al-Ālūsī rejects the Jabriyya claim that people have no capacity and all their acts resemble the involuntary twitch of a trembling person; necessary capacity contradicts this. ALUSI (الأشاعرة): Al-Ālūsī also rejects the common Ashʿarite position that human capacity never affects action, likening it to a paralyzed hand and saying it amounts in effect to Jabriyya doctrine. ALUSI-FULL (author): The phrase Iyyaka naʿbudu entails that acts issue from people through an effective capacity; saying capacity is only nominal or equivalent to none contradicts necessity and reason."}, {"id": "1:5/q13/p6", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: god's enabling aid accompanies and sustains action.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur rejects devaluing reward-and-fear worship as a Sufi excess: Islam repeatedly encourages it and it is the practice of most believers, though rare people may reach higher motives."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q14", "question": "Why is إِيَّاكَ repeated?", "turns_on": "Whether each verb requires an object or repetition provides emphasis, independent restriction, or another purpose", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q14/p1", "position": "Repetition makes God explicitly the source of aid.", "reasons": "QURTUBI (author): Repeating iyyāka prevents anyone from supposing that while worship is directed to God, help is sought from someone else. BAYDAWI (author): Repeating iyyāka makes explicit that God alone is sought for help. ABUHAYYAN (author): The repeated iyyāka explicitly identifies God as the one from whom aid is sought; without it, the wording could leave the source unspecified. IBNKATHIR (author): Fronting and repeating iyyāka marks special concern and restriction: worship is for God alone and reliance is on Him alone, the perfection of obedience. ALUSI (قيل): One view explains the repeated object as explicitly identifying God as the one from whom help is requested; without it, the helper could remain unspecified. ALUSI-FULL (author): One explanation for repeating Iyyaka is to specify that help is sought from God, which might remain unspecified if only one object were used."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p2", "position": "Repetition adds emphasis.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (author): Iyyāka is repeated because the two different verbs each need emphasis and focused attention. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Iyyaka is repeated because each of the two different verbs requires its own emphasis and focus. BURHAN (author): One explanation for repeating “You alone” is emphasis, like repeating “between” in “between Zayd and between ʿAmr.”"}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p3", "position": "Repetition avoids an unintended dependence between the two acts.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): One explanation for repeating iyyaka is to prevent the mistaken impression that worship and seeking help cannot be separated. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Repeating You explicitly restricts seeking aid to God; without repetition it could leave the aid's recipient unspecified or suggest worship and aid occur only together."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p4", "position": "Each verb independently takes its fronted object.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (author): Repeating iyyāka makes worship and seeking help two independently intended sentences. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Repeating iyyāka makes worship and seeking help two deliberate clauses and explicitly identifies God as the one from whom help is requested."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p5", "position": "Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence. WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p6", "position": "Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun.", "reasons": "TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p7", "position": "The order is meaningful and the repeated object is eloquent; poetic analogies are assessed.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The order is meaningful and the repeated object is eloquent; poetic analogies are assessed. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The order is meaningful and the repeated object is eloquent; poetic analogies are assessed."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p8", "position": "Each verb independently takes the repeated object, unlike the analogy with bayna.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Each verb independently takes the repeated object, unlike the analogy with bayna. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Each verb independently takes the repeated object, unlike the analogy with bayna."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p9", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: repetition makes god explicitly the source of aid.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): The author says no explanation for the repeated object is needed: two different verbs each require an object, so stating both is normal and deletion would be exceptional."}, {"id": "1:5/q14/p10", "position": "Repetition marks different relations of worship and aid to God.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi says the repeated object marks different grounds of relation: worship is directed to God in itself, while asking assistance depends on an attribute of His."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q15", "question": "Why does worship precede asking for help?", "turns_on": "Whether order reflects purpose and means, a request after offering worship, simultaneity, coherence, or verse endings", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q15/p1", "position": "The order reflects a relation between worship, aid, and the surrounding text.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): Although divine aid is necessary, the verse puts worship before asking for help: it requests the appeal for aid, which can follow an act of worship, not the aid itself. RAZI-FULL (author): Since the necessarily existent precedes contingent beings in existence, mention of the Eternal should precede all other speech. RAZI-FULL (author): Although the same reasons might seem to favor putting God before “praise,” praise can be given to others, so “for God” must restrict it; worship can never go to another, so “You alone” comes first. RAZI-FULL (author): “There is no god but You” means every attribute of 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
