<<chunk 40, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:5/q10", "question": "What does نَسْتَعِينُ mean and how is it formed?", "turns_on": "The derivation from ʿawn and the sense of requesting aid", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q10/p1", "position": "Seeking help means requesting aid; the form derives from the root ʿawn with regular sound changes.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA (author): In nastaʿīnu, the vowel of the original wāw moves to ʿayn, and the wāw becomes yāʾ because the preceding consonant has kasra. IBNATIYYA (author): The verbal noun istiʿāna derives from istiʿwānan: the wāw's vowel moves to ʿayn, then the wāw becomes alif after fatḥa. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Nastaʿīn derives from nastaʿūn by moving the wāw's vowel to the ʿayn and changing wāw to yāʾ after kasra. QURTUBI (author): The form nastaʿīn derives from nastaʿwinu: the vowel of wāw transfers to ʿayn and turns to yāʾ; the verbal noun derives from istaʿwana, where transferred wāw becomes alif and one of two meeting alifs is deleted, with disagreement over which, while tāʾ compensates. BAYDAWI (author): Istiʿāna is seeking help. Necessary assistance includes capacity, conceiving the act, tools, and material; when these obtain, one can be morally commanded. ABUHAYYAN (author): Istiʿāna means seeking aid; the form istifʿala has twelve uses, including request, transformation, treating something as something, and several forms of equivalence or substitution. ABUHAYYAN (author): Istiʿāna means asking for help, as in other verbs of request. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Istiʿāna means requesting help, and requesting is one of twelve meanings of the verb pattern istifʿāl, alongside the cited related semantic functions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Istiʿāna is derived from the root for help, with regular vowel changes across forms, and takes either a direct object or the preposition bāʾ. SAMIN-DURR (author): Nastaʿīnu derives from nastaʿwinu: a preceding kasra changes the quiescent wāw to yāʾ, as in mīzān and mīqāt. ALUSI (author): The same kasra on the imperfect prefix occurs in comparable verbs such as nastaʿīnu, except where the following sound makes the kasra difficult; some also say yijillu for yajalu. ALUSI-FULL (author): Istiʿāna means seeking assistance, and the yāʾ in its verb comes from a root wāw."}, {"id": "1:5/q10/p2", "position": "Seeking help is a request for assistance.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): Seeking help is requesting assistance and support. BIQAI (الحرالي): For al-Ḥarālī, the following verses are voiced on the creatures' tongues: worship is the servant's duty, while asking for aid belongs to God; the passage is shared between them. BURSEVI (author): Seeking help means asking God for aid in worship, in what exceeds our power, against Satan, and in the needs of worldly and religious life. ALUSI (author): Seeking aid means requesting assistance; the yāʾ in the verb is changed from an original wāw. ALUSI (قيل): Another view says repetition prevents the mistaken implication that one draws near to God only by combining worship with asking for aid. ALUSI-FULL (author): Worship brings the servant near to God, whereas requesting assistance does not itself do so, making worship more important. ELMALILI (author): Isti‘ana means asking for aid or assistance; giving help is i‘ana, and mutual assistance is ta‘awun, so the terms must be distinguished. IBNASHUR (author): Seeking help is requesting assistance; assistance makes a difficult act easier through tools, bodily participation, guidance or teaching, counsel, or money, as illustrated by al-Hariri’s ‘my character is a fine helper.’ IBNASHUR (author): Seeking God’s help means exerting one’s own capacity while asking God to facilitate what a person cannot accomplish alone; this is the religious sense of divine assistance. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Seeking help means asking another to ease a difficult act through tools, physical cooperation, teaching, advice, or money; seeking God's help concerns what a person cannot achieve alone while still exerting their own ability."}, {"id": "1:5/q10/p3", "position": "Nastaʿīn derives from the root ʿawn through vowel changes.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author or reported authority): Nastaʿīn derives from the root ʿawn through vowel changes."}, {"id": "1:5/q10/p4", "position": "Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q11", "question": "How is نَسْتَعِينُ read and parsed?", "turns_on": "The vowel of the imperfect prefix and the dialects and transmitters cited", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q11/p1", "position": "The initial nūn is read with kasra.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (ابن حبيش): Ibn Hubaysh reads nastaʿinu with kasra on its initial nūn. KASHSHAF-FULL (ابن حبيش): Ibn Hubaysh reads nasta'in with kasra on the initial nūn. IBNATIYYA (الأعمش وابن وثاب والنخعي): Al-Aʿmash, Ibn Waththāb, and al-Nakhaʿī read wa-nistaʿīnu with kasra on the initial nūn, a dialect of some Qurashīs. QURTUBI (يحيى بن وثاب والأعمش): Yaḥyā ibn Waththāb and al-Aʿmash read nistaʿīn with kasra on the nūn, a dialect of Tamīm, Asad, Qays, and Rabīʿa that signals derivation from istaʿāna. QURTUBI-FULL (يحيى بن وثاب والأعمش): The clause is coordinated with the preceding one; these readers use a kasra on the nūn in nastaʿīn, a dialect of several tribes, deriving it from nastaʿawn through sound changes. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The imperfect verbs with kasra are a Tamīm dialect feature when the following consonant is not uḍamma. ABUHAYYAN (عبيد بن عمير الليثي، وزر بن حبيش، ويحيى بن وثاب، والنخعي، والأعمش): These readers pronounce the initial nūn of nastaʿīn with kasra, matching Qays, Tamīm, Asad, and Rabīʿa; similar imperfect forms follow the same rule. IBNKATHIR (يحيى بن وثاب والأعمش): All readers open the initial nūn of nastaʿīn except Yahya ibn Waththab and al-A'mash, who use kasra, a dialect of several Arab tribes. NASHR (يحيى بن وثاب): Yahya b. Waththab reads the first nūn of nastaʿīn with kasra, a well-known and good dialect."}, {"id": "1:5/q11/p2", "position": "The initial nūn is read with fatḥa.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (الجمهور): The majority pronounce the initial nūn of nastaʿīn with fatḥa, the Hijazi and most correct form. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): The majority pronounce the nūn of nastaʿīn with fatḥa; Abū Ḥayyān calls this the eloquent Ḥijāzī form."}, {"id": "1:5/q11/p3", "position": "Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author or reported authority): Readings and grammar of iyyāka, naʿbudu and nastaʿīn, with their dialects and morphology, are reported."}, {"id": "1:5/q11/p4", "position": "The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses.", "reasons": "THALABI (author or reported authority): The source explains worship, aid, the nastaʿīn reading, repetition, and reasons for the paired clauses."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q12", "question": "For what is God's help sought?", "turns_on": "Whether the omitted object is general or restricted to worship and guidance", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q12/p1", "position": "The request is general, including worship and every affair.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Seeking help is unqualified so it covers every matter in which help is needed. IBNATIYYA (author): Nastaʿīnu means asking God for help in all affairs; the declaration as a whole disavows idols. TABRISI (author): Nastaʿīn means asking God for success and assistance in worship and all affairs; tawfiq combines all causes needed for an act to occur. NASAFI (author): The unqualified request for aid embraces every kind of help; alternatively, it asks God’s help and enabling for worship, with ‘guide us’ specifying the requested assistance. NASAFI-FULL (author): The request for aid is unrestricted and covers every need; alternatively it asks for God's help and enabling grace in performing acts of worship, which the following request for guidance specifies. ABUHAYYAN (author): The unqualified terms worship and seeking help encompass every act of worship and every matter for which help is sought. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Both worship and seeking help are unqualified so they include every act of worship and every matter for which help is sought. IBNKATHIR (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the servant worships, fears, and hopes in God alone, and seeks His help for obedience and every affair. DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the servant seeks God's help for obedience and for all affairs. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains “You alone we worship” as worshipping, affirming God's oneness, fearing and hoping in Him alone, and seeking His help for obedience and all affairs. ITQAN (author): An omitted complement can express generality: 'You alone we ask for help' means in worship and all our affairs, while God's call to the Abode of Peace addresses each person. ALUSI (author): The unexpressed object of seeking aid may be unrestricted, like an omitted object that implies generality; choosing only some needs would require an arbitrary preference. ALUSI (البيضاوي): Al-Ālūsī says al-Bayḍāwī’s presentation also points toward preferring an unrestricted object of aid. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī nevertheless prefers the unrestricted sense: seeking aid through worship can serve every legitimate purpose, and the straight path embraces all religious and worldly affairs and ultimate salvation. ALUSI (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): In an authentic report, the Prophet tells Ibn ʿAbbās: when you seek aid, seek it from God; al-Ālūsī sees this as supporting unrestricted reliance and thinks it likely explains Ibn ʿAbbās’s view of the verse. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): Some take the unexpressed object of seeking help universally, like an unrestricted verb of giving; al-Bayḍāwī's practice favors this, and it accords with a report from Ibn ʿAbbās. A
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
