<<chunk 40, part 1 of 0..5>>
LUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi prefers an unrestricted request for assistance because it unifies the surah's meaning and includes faith, worship, conduct, social dealings, salvation, and escape from every kind of error. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (روح المعاني): The omitted object gives seeking aid general scope; otherwise the verse would leave aid for needs beyond worship unknown. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Reliance is left unrestricted so it includes every matter for which a person may seek God's help, rather than one worldly task. STUDYQURAN (author): Servitude precedes seeking help because one first recognizes the sovereign’s power; help is requested for worship and all affairs, since people never act independently or worship by their own strength."}, {"id": "1:5/q12/p2", "position": "God's help is requested for the servant's needs.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī supports dependence on God with the command to seek help through patience and prayer and Moses' command to seek God's aid and be patient; a divine-book saying warns against hoping in anyone else. RAZI-FULL (author): The verse’s mention of God’s servants already contains the aid sought in 1:5, because Satan is barred from them. RAZI-FULL (author): Human assistance-seeking serves an aim, so the aim comes first mentally, as the intention to live in a house precedes its construction. ABUHAYYAN (أبو الحسن بن سيده): Ibn Sīda says tamāsaktu, masaktu, amsaktu, and istamsaktu bi-shayʾ have the same sense, holding fast to something; this adds two equivalence uses to istifʿala. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Including istifʿāl forms that match tafāʿala and tafaʿʿala raises the pattern's possible meanings from twelve to fourteen. SAMIN-DURR (author): The sīn marks requesting help, while استفعل also conveys adoption, transformation, finding or deeming, causative and related meanings, and sometimes replaces other verb patterns. BIQAI (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says whoever seeks God's aid for a burden according to this verse receives help proportionate to it; failure comes from forfeiting one's share of God, ignorance of the verse's implications, or heedlessness of its blessing. BURSEVI (author): The two phrases mean serving and asking help from God alone. ALUSI (author): Delaying the request for aid also preserves the end-rhyme of the verses. ELMALILI (author): Even intelligent people cannot escape dependence on hope and fear, and no individual can leave this field of helplessness alone. QUTB-ZILAL (author): God made natural forces helpful allies; people gain their aid by observation, knowledge, and cooperation, while harm often follows ignorance of their laws. IBNASHUR (الحريري): Al-Hariri writes in the Maqāma, ‘My character is a fine helper,’ using ʿawn in the ordinary sense of aid. IBNASHUR (author): The complement governed by ‘seek help’ is omitted; its normal construction would name the object after ʿalā, and omission makes the request general while reserving it to God out of reverence. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The exclusivity repudiates polytheists who sought help from their gods, including drawing lots with arrows placed beside idols. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The hadith urging God’s servants to be brothers clarifies the communal bond; believers aid one another but know no one can give without God’s will. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Seeking aid from God affirms His unlimited power."}, {"id": "1:5/q12/p3", "position": "The request is specifically for aid in worship, explained by guidance.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI (author): The request may concern every important matter or specifically performance of worship. ALUSI (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Zamakhsharī prefers aid specifically for performing worship; the following request for guidance specifies that aid and fits the passage closely, while worship is contrary to the self’s inclinations. ALUSI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf considers it better to seek God's help and enabling specifically for worship, with Guide us to the straight path explaining the requested assistance."}, {"id": "1:5/q12/p4", "position": "Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author or reported authority): Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained. BAGHAWI-FULL (author or reported authority): Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained."}, {"id": "1:5/q12/p5", "position": "Help is sought for worship.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author or reported authority): Worship affirms God's oneness; the servant asks help for worship, and a report divides the sūra between God and the servant."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q13", "question": "What kinds of divine aid does the request concern?", "turns_on": "Whether ability and aid precede, accompany, or facilitate action", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q13/p1", "position": "Aid includes the capacity and conditions necessary for action.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): A second reason to ask is to retain capacity for future obedience over time or to avoid acts that would cancel capacity, depending on one's theory of its persistence. RAZI-FULL (author): Human capacity is equally disposed to acting or abstaining; action needs a preponderating motive, which cannot come from the servant without regress, so God must assist. RAZI-FULL (author): People with similar ability, intellect, effort, and desire seek true belief, yet only some attain it; the needed aid must come from God rather than a human or angel, which would restart the question. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī resolves the dispute by saying capacity affects action only alongside a decisive motive; divine assistance creates that motive and removes the contrary one. RAZI-FULL (author): God's share is creating the decisive motive; the servant's share is that the action issues from him when capacity and motive coincide, a subtle account of agency. ITQAN (قيل): A spiritual explanation sees a movement from creatures’ initial distance and inability to converse with God to readiness for intimate address after knowing, praising, and worshipping Him. ALUSI (author): If the verse bears on created acts, al-Ālūsī takes it to affirm that people have real capacity to act, effective by God’s permission but not independent of Him. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī says the worship clause presupposes an effective human capacity: one cannot be told to produce an act without some capacity that contributes to its occurrence; kasb alone does not satisfy him. ALUSI-FULL (author): Iyyaka nastaʿīn denies independence: human capacity and action depend on God's permission and aid, yielding neither compulsion nor delegation of control. ELMALILI (author): In voluntary acts we are the proximate cause through our request, but not the complete cause, since we depend on necessary aid; the Creator makes the total causal set. IBNASHUR (العلماء): Scholars define necessary aid as creating what completes an act: the agent’s capacity, awareness of the act, its material, and its tool; together these are ability or sound means and tools, enabling moral obligation. IBNASHUR (الراغب): Al-Raghib calls the second, easing kind of aid tawfīq; the author says this does not conflict with scholars’ definition because it follows the necessary aid that first makes tawfīq possible. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship is impossible without God’s aid and enabling; seeking aid admits human inability and dependence, countering pride and arrogance. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Worship is possible only with God's aid and enabling; asking for help cures pride and admits human weakness and inability to bear the trust unaided."}, {"id": "1:5/q13/p2", "position": "God's enabling aid accompanies and sustains action.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Best is asking God and His enabling grace for help in worship; 1:6 specifies aid as guidance. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The request for help is general, but its best sense is seeking God's aid and enabling grace to perform worship; the next verse specifies that request. RAZI-FULL (author): Although assistance is usually sought before work begins, the worshiper asks God to help complete worship already begun and protect it from death, illness, or changed motives. RAZI-FULL (author): No act of obedience can be performed without God's protection from sin and enabling grace; Rāzī supports reliance on both rational and transmitted proofs. RAZI-FULL (author): A person may delay an act until a decisive motive enters the heart and opposing motives are removed; God creates these motives, which is the meaning of assistance. RAZI-FULL (author): Creating a decisive motive without an opposing one is God's aid; the request not to let hearts swerve means not creating motives toward false belief and corrupt action, while mercy creates motives to good. QURTUBI (author): We seek God’s help, support, and enabling success. BAYDAWI (author): Ascribing worship to oneself might imply pride, so the following request shows worship cannot occur or endure without God's aid and enabling grace. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Saying “we worship” might sound boastful, so “we seek Your help” clarifies that worship itself depends on God's aid and enabling. ALUSI (author): After attributing worship to oneself, the worshipper immediately asks for God’s help to show that worship itself depends on His help, enabling grace, and permission. ALUSI-FULL (author): Saying I worship might sound self-congratulatory; immediately asking for help shows that worship itself depends on God's enabling and permission."}, {"id": "1:5/q13/p3", "position": "Aid can facilitate or motivate an already possible act.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Necessary aid makes action possible; nonessential aid makes it easier or encourages it, but is not required for moral responsibility. ALUSI (البيضاوي): Al-Bayḍāwī distinguishes necessary aid, such as power, understanding, tools, and material, from nonessential aids that ease o
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
