<<chunk 40, part 4 of 0..5>>
id; the latter opens the question of determinism and free will. QURTUBI (أبو حفص الفرغاني): Al-Sulamī transmits from Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Shādhān, from Abū Ḥafṣ al-Farghānī, that affirming this verse frees one from both determinism and Qadarism. ABUHAYYAN (قالوا): They say naʿbud refutes the determinists while nastaʿīn refutes the Qadarites. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Some say We worship answers the determinists and We seek help answers the advocates of free will. BURSEVI (author): The pairing expresses Sunni teaching: the servant performs actions while God creates and grants success, rejecting both Jabriyya denial of human action and Mu'tazila denial of divine aid. ALUSI (الجبرية): The Jabriyya argue that if a servant acted independently, asking God for help in acting would serve no purpose. ALUSI (author): The aid clause denies independent human action and affirms action through God’s permission and assistance; al-Ālūsī calls this the middle way between compulsion and absolute delegation. ALUSI-FULL (الجبرية): The Jabriyya argue that if humans acted independently, asking God for help with action would have no point. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi reads the verse as affirming human capacity that has real effect only by God's permission, rejecting compulsion, inert capacity, and independent human control alike. ELMALILI (author): The verse itself assigns the capacity to seek to us and assistance and power to God, excluding both Jabriyya compulsion and Qadariyya denial of destiny. ELMALILI (author): A hadith says that when God wills to enact His decree, He removes the reason of people of understanding; this concerns good or bad seeking, not compulsion. ELMALILI (author): The request of existence is not existence itself: seeking is a relation among existents, not a created existent, so it entails neither infinite regress nor compulsion nor creation."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p2", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: the determinist argument or its rejection is reported.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): It is mistaken to infer that every partial will succeeds; when people fail, they may wrongly swing toward compulsion by treating willing as creation and assuming God cannot intervene. ELMALILI (author): The account rejects both Jabriyya or materialist views that reduce people to soulless machines and the idea that humans create like God."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p3", "position": "Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun.", "reasons": "TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p4", "position": "Divine assistance may facilitate an act and asking for it remains meaningful.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author or reported authority): Divine assistance may facilitate an act and asking for it remains meaningful. JISHUMI (author or reported authority): Divine assistance may facilitate an act and asking for it remains meaningful."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p5", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: the delegation or independent-action argument or its rejection is reported.", "reasons": "ALUSI (المعتزلة): He rejects the Muʿtazilite claim that people act independently, so that God wills what they do not do and they do what God does not will, because decisive texts refute it."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p6", "position": "The delegation or independent-action argument or its rejection is reported.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): The verse about entrusting one's affair to God illustrates this subtlety concerning delegated trust."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p7", "position": "Human action depends on divine aid while retaining a human role.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Universal will is created, while partial will, seeking, and choice called kasb are an uncreated relation belonging to us."}, {"id": "1:5/q16/p8", "position": "Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q17", "question": "What do the paired clauses teach together?", "turns_on": "What the pairing affirms about devotion, dependence, covenant, and practical conduct", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q17/p1", "position": "The clauses join the servant's worship with dependence on God's help.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): After praising God and listing His attributes, the speech directly addresses the one worthy of worship and help. KASHSHAF (author): Worship and help are paired to join what servants offer their Lord with what they request from Him. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Joining worship with help unites what servants offer in drawing near to God with what they need from Him. RAZI-FULL (author): The servant's needs multiply upon entering existence, setting up the claim that present provision depends on God as Lord, Merciful, and Compassionate. RAZI-FULL (author): God's miracles, including raising the mountain over Moses and splitting the sea, make it foolish to equate Him in worship with inert, base, or finite creatures. RAZI-FULL (author): God's names cover all three stages of the servant's life: deity for his origin, Lord and the two Merciful names for present needs, and Owner of Judgment Day for the afterlife; all welfare depends on Him alone. RAZI-FULL (author): Putting “You” first identifies the true object of worship and produces reverent attention; Rāzī illustrates this with an expert wrestler who lost to a rustic until he recognized his opponent. RAZI-FULL (author): Following worship with a request for help prevents pride: the rank achieved through worship came from God's support, not the servant's own strength. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī divides the case for reliance on God into rational proofs and transmitted evidence, then begins with the rational proofs. BIQAI (الحرالي): God's side comes first because His assistance precedes worship and makes it possible. BIQAI-FULL (author): The verse teaches confession of inability, need and reliance on God's power; that dependence leads directly to asking for guidance along the necessary path. ITQAN (قيل): One explanation says that after God is described as Lord, Merciful, and Master of Judgment, the worshipper addresses Him alone as worthy of worship and reliance. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī concludes that no one but God is the true source of help: asking needy people for what they lack is folly, and he quotes a poem on reliance upon God alone. ELMALILI (author): Even those who claim no concern with worship continually replace one object of worship with another and live in uncertainty without considering death. ELMALILI (author): The pledge is a heavy burden, but the dignity of God's exaltation is no light goal; human beings cannot undertake it through their own power, so seeking God's aid is necessary. ELMALILI (İbn Abbas): Ibn Abbas's transmitted view supports the general scope of seeking aid, in worship and all other affairs. ELMALILI (author): The resulting meaning is that believers ask God alone for help both in worship and every other matter, unlike disbelievers who seek help elsewhere. ELMALILI (author): The two declarative clauses also perform an implied act of commitment, like conventional oaths, covenants, or contracts; the prior speech signaled the obligation this acceptance entails. ELMALILI (author): All living beings are carried by this covenantal law; disbelievers follow it unconsciously, while believers experience it consciously as well as bodily. ELMALILI (author): The verse entails both unity of Lordship, accepting God's unique real essence, and unity of worship, a pledge to form a unified community; the latter builds a relational unity on the former. IBNASHUR (author): Seeking God's help frees the worshipper from imagining self-sufficiency and from reliance on personal power before His greatness. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Human power and will cannot meet every need; reliance on people or superhuman powers without divine guidance has bred shirk and false systems, while this verse directs worship and reliance to the right source and establishes tawhid. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The pairing joins what servants offer God in worship with what they need and ask from Him. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The name Allah suits the move to worship because it denotes the deity to be worshipped, and the author says it is paired with worship more than fifty times in the Quran. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The guidance request ties the chapter together: Rabb guides, Rahman and Rahim show mercy, worship and reliance require the path, and the favored oppose the astray."}, {"id": "1:5/q17/p2", "position": "The clauses affirm exclusive devotion and dependence on God.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Every polytheist worships a partner to seek benefit or escape harm, while strict monotheists place hope, fear, desire, and dread in God alone and worship and ask help only from Him."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q18", "question": "What inward reading is given to the paired clauses?", "turns_on": "The different spiritual correspondences assigned to worship and help", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q18/p1", "position": "The clauses describe inward service, witnessing, sincerity, and reliance on God.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Razi maps worship to three stages: outward observance is the law, seeking the unseen through divine support is the path, and seeing all affairs as God's is the reality. RAZI-FULL (author): The discerning worshiper attends to the giver, not the gift, and in hardship to God, not the affliction; this keeps the heart absorb
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
