<<chunk 40, part 3 of 0..5>>
majesty and perfection belongs only to God; ultimately reason, speech, understanding, and imagination fail before Him. BAYDAWI (author): The worshipper attends first to God and views worship as a noble relation, not personal achievement; the gnostic reaches communion through total attention to God and loss of self-awareness. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The worshipper should attend first to the worshipped and regard worship as a noble relation to God, not as a self-congratulatory act. BURSEVI (author): The worshipper should attend first to God, seeing worship as a noble connection to Him rather than as a deed owned by the self. ALUSI (author): The object comes first because God precedes worshipper and worship in being, so the sentence order mirrors reality. ALUSI (author): Putting first what the Master asks of the servant, before what the servant requests from the Master, better displays sincere servitude. ALUSI (author): Worship accords more closely with mention of recompense, while seeking aid fits more closely with the later request for guidance. ALUSI (author): When two linked actions are mentioned, reversing their order can leave the relation intact, as in saying either that one paid a debt and then did a kindness or vice versa. ALUSI (author): Al-Ālūsī prefers the view that repetition marks two different relations: worship relates to God directly, while seeking aid relates through an attribute or means. ALUSI (author): Limiting the request to aid in worship would leave the Qurʾān’s opening chapter silent about seeking God’s aid for other needs, a conclusion al-Ālūsī will not accept. ELMALILI (author): Before later legal convention, the shared lexical root meaning of worship should be considered; its broadest sense appears in ubudet or abed and includes worshipper and object of worship. IBNASHUR (author): The first purification is rejecting denial of God and associating partners with Him, expressed by worshipping Him alone. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Asking God alone for help rejects imagined self-sufficiency and admits human beings have no power before His greatness. TABATABAI (author): The author defers discussion of the changed address in the request for guidance to a later passage. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship relates to God’s divinity and name Allah, while seeking aid relates to His lordship and the name Rabb, matching the opening order."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p2", "position": "Worship is offered as a means before a request for help.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): Worship comes before asking for help because offering the means before the request merits a response. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Worship comes first because presenting a means before making a request makes a response more likely. NASAFI (author): Worship precedes asking for aid either because presenting a means before asking for a need makes a response likelier, or to preserve the verse order, as with al-Rahman’s precedence despite the greater rhetorical force of the other name. NASAFI-FULL (author): Worship precedes asking for aid because presenting the means before a request brings a response closer; alternatively, the order follows the preceding arrangement of the verses. ABUHAYYAN (author): Worship precedes the request for aid because the means is presented before the need, so the request may be answered. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Worship is joined to seeking help because the verse combines what the servant offers God with what the servant asks from Him; worship comes first as a means before the request. SAMIN-DURR (author): Worship precedes the request for help because worship is the means leading to a requested need. ITQAN (الزنجاني والطيبي): Al-Zanjani and al-Tibi define a good transition to the request as stating the means before reaching the intended aim; the verse moves from praise to the request for help and guidance. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Worship precedes reliance because worship is the purpose of creating humans and jinn (51:56), while reliance is a means to worship; God's right also precedes a request."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p3", "position": "The order preserves cadence or verse endings.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI (author): Worship comes first to preserve verse endings and because presenting the means before requesting a need makes a response more likely. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Repeating إياك explicitly reserves seeking help for God, while placing worship first preserves rhyme and teaches that presenting a means before one's request aids its acceptance. BURHAN (author): One explanation for putting the request for help after worship, though help precedes worship in sense, is that the order suits the sūrah’s verse endings. BURSEVI (author): Placing worship before the request follows the verse endings and teaches that presenting a means before asking a need is more likely to bring an answer. IBNASHUR (author): The order also preserves the sūrah’s cadence, whose endings use the same or a nearby consonant of the tongue’s articulation. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Worship precedes aid because it draws near to God, aid serves the creature and can assist worship, and the order also suits the surah's cadence."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p4", "position": "The order reflects the relation and context of worship and aid.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): Worship comes before seeking aid because it is the cause of receiving aid. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): “You alone we worship” means worshipping and affirming God's oneness; “You alone we ask for help” is the servant's part after asking. ALUSI-FULL (author): Islam begins by singling God out in worship and escaping shirk; explicit dependence on His aid comes after monotheism is established. ALUSI-FULL (author): One reason to mention worship first is that it is a trust God offered to the heavens, earth, and mountains, so its discharge takes priority. IBNASHUR (author): Worship precedes seeking help because it draws the servant near God, is the worshipper’s own commitment before a request for aid, is presupposed by divine assistance, and is itself among the acts aided."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p5", "position": "Worship is the principal end or duty and aid its means.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR (author): Worship precedes asking for help because worship is the intended end while seeking help is its means; sound judgment puts the more important matter first. BURHAN (author): Worship precedes the request for help because worship is the more important matter. ELMALILI (author): Rights of people receive even greater care than God's rights; mercy precedes worship, worship precedes asking for help, and duty precedes the claim to a right, though divine mercy establishes the right first. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): Worship precedes seeking aid because worship is the purpose for which humans and jinn were created, while aid is its means."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p6", "position": "Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun.", "reasons": "TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun. TAB (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help is sought for obedience; al-Ṭabarī argues over aid, order, and repeated pronoun."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p7", "position": "Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): Aid is sought for worship, obedience and all affairs; divine favor and the ordering are debated."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p8", "position": "Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained. BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): Iyyāka is a pronoun; worship means humble obedience; divine aid accompanies action; order is explained."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p9", "position": "Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author or reported authority): Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained. BAGHAWI-FULL (author or reported authority): Iyyāka and worship are glossed; aid and the order of worship and request are explained."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p10", "position": "The order is meaningful and the repeated object is eloquent; poetic analogies are assessed.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The order is meaningful and the repeated object is eloquent; poetic analogies are assessed."}, {"id": "1:5/q15/p11", "position": "Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author or reported authority): Worship is humble obedience; the repeated object may add emphasis or satisfy each verb; wāw need not show sequence."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q16", "question": "How do worship and seeking help relate to human agency?", "turns_on": "The role of human capacity, divine creation and assistance, and rival views of compulsion or delegation", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q16/p1", "position": "The determinist argument or its rejection is reported.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (الجبرية): The Jabriyya argue that if people acted independently, asking God for help with their actions would be pointless. RAZI-FULL (author): The servant's obligations comprise the act of worship and recognition that worship is only possible with God's a
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
