<<chunk 41, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "1:5/q19", "question": "What does the divided-prayer report say about this verse?", "turns_on": "How the divine report assigns God's and the servant's shares and responds to recitation", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q19/p1", "position": "The verse is shared between God and the servant in the divided-prayer report.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أبو هريرة عن النبي): In the divided-prayer report, God calls the basmala glorification, al-Hamd praise, the two mercy names extolling, the Master of Judgment entrustment, and the remaining response a sharing and a request granted. RAZI-FULL (الله تعالى): In a divine report transmitted by the Prophet, God responds to each Fatiha phrase: the opening remembers Him, praise praises Him, the mercy names magnify Him, Judgment Day glorifies Him or is entrusted to Him, worship belongs to Him, aid relies on Him, and guidance is the servant's request. RAZI-FULL (author): The report that worship and aid belong between God and servant expresses determinism: a balanced capacity acts only when a decisive motive tips it, and that motive must be created by God. NASAFI (أبو هريرة عن النبي): Abu Hurayra reports God’s dialogue dividing the Fatiha between Himself and the servant: praise, glorification, and exaltation belong to God; the worshipper’s request for guidance and the response to it belong to the servant, while worship and aid are shared. IBNKATHIR (الله تعالى): In a divine report, God divides the prayer between Himself and His servant, responds to each recited section, calls 1:5 shared between them, and grants the servant's request. BIQAI (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Al-Ḥarālī cites the authenticated report in which the Prophet conveys God's statement that prayer is divided equally between God and His servant, then recites this sūra. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali explains the sound report that God divided prayer between Himself and His servant: the first three verses are God's praise, which He accepts from the reciting servant as praise and glorification. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the paired verse belongs between God and servant: worship is the servant's commitment, aid is God's gift, and aid precedes and enables worship. DURR (الله): Worship means worshipping and unifying God, while the request for help is the servant's share in the shared verse. DURR-FULL (الله عز وجل): In Abū Hurayra's report, God says the prayer is divided between Him and His servant: the opening praise is His, the middle is shared, and the servant receives what he asks in the remainder. ITQAN (author): It is also said to be called al-Salah, as in the hadith “I divided the prayer between Me and My servant,” where “the prayer” means this surah. ITQAN (الطيبي): Al-Tibi divides the Fatiha’s religious knowledge into foundations (God and attributes, prophethood, resurrection), branches (worship), ethical perfection and seeking the path, and accounts of earlier peoples with promise and threat. ITQAN (author): The hadith “I divided the prayer between Me and My servant in two halves” supports the Fatiha’s two-thirds description. BURSEVI (النجمي): A sacred report calls sincerity a secret between God and His servant that no angel or messenger can enter. BURSEVI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sacred report says prayer is divided between God and His servant, who receives what he asks. ALUSI (الغزالي): Al-Ghazālī’s analogy treats the plural as the merit of congregational prayer over an individual prayer. ALUSI-FULL (author): The hadith God divided the prayer between Himself and His servant uses prayer to mean this surah; Alusi allows a whole-for-part figure or a literal sense by implication. ALUSI-FULL (author): Dividing the Quran into surahs renews a reader's energy, makes each memorized portion feel complete and valuable, and demonstrates that every surah is independently miraculous; the reason for varying their lengths is obvious. ALUSI-FULL (الغزالي): The plural may evoke congregational prayer, which al-Ghazali says is superior to an individual's prayer. ELMALILI (author): The verse records a profound covenant between God and servants, a mutual legal agreement that summarizes a fundamental practical and social law of nature. IBNASHUR-FULL (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A hadith in both Sahihs from Abu Hurayra has God divide prayer between Himself and the servant, answering each portion of al-Fatiha and granting the servant's request. ABUDAWUD (الله تعالى): In a hadith qudsi transmitted by Abu Hurayra, God divides al-Fatiha between Himself and the servant: praise and glorification receive divine responses, worship is mutual, and the guidance petition belongs to the servant. IBNMAJAH (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra transmits a divine report that al-Fatiha is divided between God and servant: this middle declaration belongs to both, and the servant receives what he asks. MALIK (الله تبارك وتعالى): In the qudsi report, this verse is the shared exchange between God and the servant, who receives what he asks. MUSLIM (الله تعالى): In the divine report, Allah says the central declaration of worship and request for help belongs jointly to Him and the servant, who receives what he asks. NASAI (رسول الله): Abū Hurayra transmits a qudsī report in which God divides al-Fātiḥa between Himself and the servant; the declaration of worship and plea for help is shared, and God grants what is asked. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The recurring plural prayer in every rakʿah reinforces collective worship; congregational prayer is worth twenty-seven times individual prayer."}, {"id": "1:5/q19/p2", "position": "The divided-prayer report makes this verse shared between God and the servant.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author or reported authority): Worship affirms God's oneness; the servant asks help for worship, and a report divides the sūra between God and the servant. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TUSTARI (author or reported authority): Worship is humble submission and divine unity; help enables sincere service; reports address guidance, divided prayer, and Amen. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. TAB (author or reported authority): The sūra's seven verses, its relation to earlier scripture, and the divided-prayer report are discussed. THALABI (author or reported authority): The divine report divides the prayer between God and servant. BAGHAWI (author or reported authority): The authentic divine report divides prayer and answers each verse."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q20", "question": "What rulings about reciting al-Fātiḥa in prayer are cited?", "turns_on": "Whether recitation is required and how a follower recites", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q20/p1", "position": "Reciting al-Fātiḥa is required in prayer; followers are told to recite it inwardly.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Razi supports obligatory Fatiha recitation because the Prophet consistently recited it and commands require following him. RAZI-FULL (author): The prophetic statement “no prayer without the Opening of the Book” directly supports the requirement. RAZI-FULL (author): Since God names the Fatiha “prayer,” prayer without its recitation does not occur; Razi takes this to establish that reciting it is a pillar, as his school holds. IBNKATHIR (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The opening is God's praise of Himself and instruction to servants to praise Him; the Prophet says prayer is invalid without reciting the Opening of the Book when able. ALUSI-FULL (author): The name al-Salah reflects t
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
