<<chunk 41, part 3 of 0..4>>
me lands as an opening from one life to another. STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah is a prayer encapsulating metaphysical and eschatological realities and teaches the proper human disposition toward God. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): One attribution says Satan was frightened when the Fātiḥah was revealed, among four events; others attribute the saying to the Prophet. STUDYQURAN (author): The Fātiḥah’s exalted status generated many independent commentaries, often showing how the Quran as a whole is contained in it. STUDYQURAN (ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib): A saying attributed to ʿAlī compresses the Quran into the Fātiḥah, the basmalah, its opening bāʾ, and the diacritical point beneath it. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Fātiḥah means The Opening: it opens the Book, each prayer cycle, many everyday acts, and may open the breast to faith."}, {"id": "1:5/q21/p2", "position": "The Fātiḥa and Qur'an gather the earlier scriptures' meanings and display inimitability.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The Fātiḥa and Qur'an gather the earlier scriptures' meanings and display inimitability. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The Fātiḥa and Qur'an gather the earlier scriptures' meanings and display inimitability. TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The Fātiḥa and Qur'an gather the earlier scriptures' meanings and display inimitability."}, {"id": "1:5/q21/p3", "position": "The Prophet reports God's response to the servant's recitation of the sūra.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author or reported authority): The Prophet reports God's response to the servant's recitation of the sūra."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q22", "question": "What is reported about the sūra's names, count, revelation, and virtues?", "turns_on": "The reports and explanations of its names, verse count, origin, and virtues", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q22/p1", "position": "The sūra has names and virtues tied to its content and prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Rationally, contingent beings receive existence and every perfection through God's creative power; thus every honor, joy, and virtue comes through servitude, the key to all good. SAMIN-DURR (author): The root denotes submission: a trodden road is called muʿabbad, as are a subdued camel and a person made submissive by tar. IBNKATHIR (author): Servanthood is an exalted station; God calls His Messenger His servant at the revelation, public worship, and night journey, and directs him to worship amid rejection. BURHAN (author): Al-Fātiḥa is the Mother of the Book because it contains all three fields: monotheism through 1:4, rulings in 1:5, and reminder from 1:6 onward. BURHAN (author): One explanation for the title “Mother of the Book” is that al-Fātiḥa precedes the rest of the Qurʾān as a mother precedes a daughter. BIQAI-FULL (author): A surah's name summarizes its purpose, as a title signals the details within; Adam demonstrated this naming principle when he named things before the angels. BIQAI-FULL (author): The Fatiha's many titles converge on مراقبة: it is the Mother of the Book, foundation, oft-repeated, treasure, healing, sufficing, complete, protecting, incantation, praise, thanks, supplication and prayer. BIQAI-FULL (author): The passage names al-Baqara 2:281 as the last revealed verse and says its recitation position between the debt verse and the verse before it shows revelation and recitation order can differ. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Recitation order can differ from revelation chronology; the verse allowing the Prophet to marry certain women was placed before a later restriction. BIQAI-FULL (author): The cow story makes the surah's title apt because resurrection occurs through an apparently slight human cause; it is a clearer sign of divine power than Abraham's story or earlier Israelite resurrections. DURR-FULL (عبد العزيز بن ربيع): ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz b. Rabīʿ says Iblīs groaned at the Fātiḥa's revelation as he had on the day he was cursed. DURR-FULL (مكحول): Makḥūl characterizes the Mother of the Qur'an as recitation, request, and supplication. DURR-FULL (أبو هريرة): A weakly transmitted version from Abū Hurayra adds that God acknowledges the basmala as remembrance and answers the Fātiḥa's successive praises, calling its middle verse shared and its ending the servant's. ITQAN (author): The Fatiha is named al-Ruqya, al-Shifa, and al-Shafiya in view of reports about its special virtues. ITQAN (author): It is called the Surah of Prayer because prayer depends on it. ITQAN (المرسي): Al-Mursi explains the name al-Salah as naming the surah after something necessary to it, namely prayer. ITQAN (الإمام فخر الدين): Fakhr al-Din maps the Qur’an’s four aims—God, resurrection, prophethood, and divine decree—onto the Fatiha: praise, Judgment Day, worship and reliance, and guidance through the surah’s end; this supports its name Umm al-Qur’an. ITQAN (author): There is no conflict between hadiths calling the Fatiha the greatest surah and al-Baqara the greatest: al-Baqara is greatest among surahs other than the Fatiha because of its detailed laws, parables, and arguments. ALUSI-FULL (author): The authentic hadiths imply the names al-Ruqya, al-Shifa, and al-Shafiya, identifying the surah as a protective recitation and healing. ALUSI-FULL (author): It is called oft-repeated because it recurs in each rakah; the common sense of prayer avoids objections about one-rakah and funeral prayers, while the latter is technically supplication rather than prayer. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alternative derivations of mathani are repetition with another surah, two revelations, its two parts of supplication and praise, or God's response after each verse; it may also derive from praise or divine selection for this community. ALUSI-FULL (author): Praise addresses others while the mystic sees divine virtues among them; when remembrance removes the veils and all others vanish from awareness, speech necessarily turns directly to God. ELMALILI (author): All enabling aid belongs to God, but the request is ours; capability arises when human seeking and divine assistance coincide with the act, which is called acquisition or partial will. ELMALILI (müfessirîn): Exegetes see an indication here of the virtue of congregational worship. ELMALILI (author): The author links this point to the trustworthy Spirit bringing revelation to Muhammad's heart and to God's speaking to humans by revelation or from behind a veil. ELMALILI (author): God first established this covenant in Muhammad's prophetic heart through revelation; he is the complete, truthful servant and representative individual able fully to say the verse, and the model of servanthood. IBNASHUR (author): Worship’s purpose is human perfection: God made the world display His attributes, endowed people with spirit and intellect to ascend, guided them through revelation, and prescribed repeated worship to recall judgment, discipline the self, sustain social order, and develop individual and communal virtues. IBNASHUR (author): The omitted object of ‘we seek help’ is deliberately general: it includes important acts, especially receiving religion and overcoming the self’s resistance to virtue, as indicated by the sūrah’s opening and the placement after worship. IBNASHUR (author): Knowledge, guidance, revelation, and sciences are also requested aids from God: 90:8–10 points to perception, speech and instruction, and revealed law. IBNASHUR (author): The hadith teaches an already established Muslim, so it can assume exclusivity; this sūrah opens revelation and legislation and rebukes shirk, making explicit restriction apt, while its conditional wording also implies disavowal of divination at idols. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): He reads the sura's annexation to Fatihat al-Kitab as descriptive: it means a sura characterized as the Book's opening, with no separate title needed. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The names Umm al-Qur'an and Umm al-Kitab are established in the Sunna; “mother” denotes a thing's origin and source. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): A report in Sahih al-Bukhari says Abu Sa'id al-Khudri recited Umm al-Qur'an over a person suffering from a sting as a healing prayer. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): These aims help explain why al-Fatiha is called Umm al-Qur'an. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The opening of revelation and legislation needed an emphatic exclusive claim, which also rebukes idolatry; conditional answers to any request carry the same restriction. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (author): The surah gathers the foundations of Islamic belief: God and His perfect attributes, monotheism, the Last Day, divine power, and the messengers and revelation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT (الرازي): The surah is truly the Mother of the Book because it contains both doctrinal foundations and the two pillars of action. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Al-Fatiha contains faith and good works, affirming God, the Last Day, angels, messengers, and scriptures, and joins lordship's unity to the unity of worship; it is therefore the Mother of the Book. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars place al-Fātiḥah among the earliest sūrahs revealed in Makkah. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): A report says nothing like the Fātiḥah was revealed in the Torah, Psalms, Gospel, or Quran. STUDYQURAN (Mujāhid): Mujāhid says al-Fātiḥah was revealed in Madinah. STUDYQURAN (author): The sūrah is seen as a synthesis and the Quran’s most important chapter, hence Umm al-kitāb; the title also refers to 3:7 and the celestial archetype of scripture. STUDYQURAN (author): It is called the Mother of the Quran because it contains the meaning of the entire Quran. STUDYQURAN (author): The title The Cure reflects its reputed healing power for body and soul. STUDYQURAN (author): The title The Foundation reflects the Fātiḥah’s role as a foundation for the whole Quran."}, {"id": "1:5/q22/p2", "position": "The sūra's verse count and division are discussed.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أم سلمة عن النبي): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet recited al-Fatiha while counting the basmala as its first vers
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
