<<chunk 41, part 1 of 0..4>>
hat reciting the surah in prayer is obligatory or required; some jurists hold it recommended, with a transmitted report supporting that view. ELMALILI (author): In the author's school, followers behind the prayer leader recite neither Fatiha nor anything else because the imam recites for them; a person praying alone recites as imam of a potential congregation. QUTB-ZILAL (رسول الله [ ص ]): The Prophet says prayer is invalid without reciting the Opening of the Book; the report is in both Sahih collections. QUTB-ZILAL (author): The short surah gathers core Islamic creed, worldview, feelings, and guidance, explaining its repetition in every rakʿa and why prayer without it is invalid. IBNASHUR-FULL (النبيء صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sound hadith calls a prayer without Umm al-Qur'an deficient. ABUDAWUD (أبو هريرة عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Hurayra reports the Prophet saying a prayer without Umm al-Qur'an is deficient, and advises a worshipper praying behind the imam to recite it silently. MALIK (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Hurayra reports that the Prophet calls prayer without Umm al-Qur’an deficient and tells a questioner to recite it silently behind the imam. MUSLIM (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet calls a prayer without Umm al-Qurʾān deficient and incomplete; when asked about praying behind an imam, Abu Hurayra tells them to recite it quietly. NASAI (أبو هريرة): Abū Hurayra reports that the Prophet calls prayer without Umm al-Qurʾān deficient and tells a Persian worshipper to recite it silently, even behind the imam. TIRMIDHI (أبو هريرة): Abu Hurayra transmits the Prophet’s ruling that a prayer without reciting the Opening is deficient, and tells one praying behind an imam to recite it silently to himself."}, {"id": "1:5/q20/p2", "position": "Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient.", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. MUSNAD-AHMAD (author or reported authority): The Prophet says prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; the divine report makes this verse shared between God and servant. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared. IBNHIBBAN (author or reported authority): Prayer without al-Fātiḥa is deficient; a follower recites it inwardly; the divine report makes this verse shared."}]}
{"id": "1:5/q21", "question": "How does this verse fit the sūra and Qur'an?", "turns_on": "Its relation to earlier praise, later guidance, the sūra's topics, and the wider Qur'an", "positions": [{"id": "1:5/q21/p1", "position": "The verse bridges praise of God and the ensuing request for guidance within the sūra.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF (author): The request for guidance explains what help is sought and coheres with the preceding words. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The request for guidance explains the help being sought: when asked how He should assist, the servants answer, guide us to the straight path. TABRISI (الكسائي): Al-Kisa'i supplies an implicit command to say these words, as in Qur'anic scenes where people say 'Our Lord, we have seen' and 'Peace'. RAZI (author): Razi sketches the sūra’s sequence: seek refuge from sins, begin good works in God’s name, praise and recognize his lordship and mercy, heed judgment, worship and seek help, ask guidance, and avoid ignorance and error. RAZI-FULL (author): After the servant praises God through the whole opening sūrah, God raises his standing and asks him to care for all Muslims rather than only his own needs. RAZI-FULL (author): The seven Fatiha verses remove seven vices: praise dispels desire, Lord of the worlds greed, Judgment Day anger, worship and aid pride and vanity, guidance caprice, the favored path unbelief and doubt, and the final phrase innovation. RAZI-FULL (author): The transmitted report itself says that prayer is not established without the Fatiha. RAZI-FULL (author): Muslims everywhere recite it in prayer, and the Qur'an commands following the path of believers. RAZI-FULL (author): The command to recite what is easy from the Qur'an is obligatory; because reciting other passages is not, the obligatory recitation must be the Fatiha. RAZI-FULL (author): Reciting the Fatiha is the safer course, following the prophetic instruction to leave what causes doubt for what does not. RAZI-FULL (author): The Prophet's constant practice makes abandoning his command forbidden, and Muslims agree that the Fatiha is better and more complete than another recitation. RAZI-FULL (author): If the superior prayer with the Fatiha discharges the obligation, it does not follow that the inferior prayer with another passage does; the obligation remains due. RAZI-FULL (author): Prayer seeks remembrance of the heart, and this concise surah gathers lordship and servitude and is equated with the mighty Qur'an; nothing else can replace it. RAZI-FULL (author): Worship recalls the preceding prostration while seeking aid asks God to grant success in reaching the second; both match the sitting between prostrations. RAZI-FULL (author): Since God does not act for a purpose, He follows the order of existence, with assistance preceding worship. QURTUBI (author): The clause wa-iyyāka nastaʿīn is coordinated with the preceding clause. IBNKATHIR (بعض السلف): Some early authorities call this the secret of the Fatiha, itself the secret of the Qur'an: the first clause renounces shirk and the second renounces self-power through surrender to God. BURHAN (author): Another explanation of “Opening” is that al-Fātiḥa opens the gates of Paradise, as discussed elsewhere. BURHAN (بعض الأئمة): Some imams say al-Fatiha affirms lordship, seeks guidance in Islam, and asks protection from Judaism and Christianity. BIQAI (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says all Qur'an is God's speech: some speaks about God Himself, while other passages express what people at varying levels and in varying states ought to say. BIQAI (author): The sūra begins with God's essence, points to His acts, rises to His attributes, and returns to His essence, signaling that He encompasses beginning and end. BIQAI (author): Biqāʿī points to his discussion at the end of Sūrat Iqraʾ for a fuller explanation of this hadith. BIQAI (العلامة سعد الدين مسعود ابن عمرو التفتازاني الشافعي): The second preservation is signaled by worship through the end of the sūra, whose benefits return to the afterlife. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الفضل محمد المشدالي المغربي): Al-Mashdali's method for Qur'anic coherence is to identify a surah's purpose, its prerequisites and their distance from the goal, then answer expectations raised as the discourse unfolds. BIQAI-FULL (author): Prophets, scriptures and laws ultimately gather people to truth so they may know their sovereign and what pleases Him; knowledge and practice together serve the Qur'an's purpose. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): The basmala relates to the Fatiha as the Fatiha relates to the Qur'an: each is a compact synthesis of what the larger whole details. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says all Qur'an is God's speech, but some verses voice what creatures at different levels ought to say yet cannot express; God teaches them words that fulfill their duty. BIQAI-FULL (author): The Qur'an's arrangement is miraculous, so the Fatiha must retain its required order in prayer; rearrangement or insertion of foreign material invalidates it. Al-Isfahani locates its clearest inimitability in order. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali contrasts the Qur'an's detailed, dispersed sequence with the Fatiha's seven complete universals, and makes the Fatiha a mirror of the servant's move from misguidance to guidance. BIQAI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A Prophetic report says he was sent to complete noble character; the author links this completion with the Fatiha's comprehensive opening and the Qur'an's culmination. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali describes the Qur'an's majesty through rulings spanning immediate and deferred realities, witnessed experience, and reports of the past and patterns that recur in time. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the Qur'an reached the Prophet on h
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
