<<chunk 41, part 4 of 0..4>>
e, followed by the rest of its verses. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the seven repeated verses are the Qur'an's gathered essence and its contents will be disclosed at creation's completion; earlier scriptures progress from changeable scrolls and lasting books to the Qur'an, which completes religion. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says the Qur'an's sevenfold gathering in Muhammad's heart relates to the Mother of Qur'an's universals as the Qur'an's gathering in his heart relates to the Mother. DURR-FULL (أم سلمة): Umm Salama reports that the Prophet recited the Fātiḥa including the basmala and called it seven verses. DURR-FULL (أبو سعيد بن المعلى): Abū Saʿīd b. al-Muʿallā reports that the Prophet cited 8:24 when he failed to answer his call in prayer, then taught him al-Fātiḥa as the greatest sūra, the seven oft-repeated, and the great Qur'an. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet tells Ubayy that no sūra like the Fātiḥa was revealed in the Torah, Gospel, Psalms, or Qur'an, and identifies it as the seven oft-repeated. DURR-FULL (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy b. Kaʿb reports that no equivalent of the Fātiḥa occurs in the Torah, Gospel, Psalms, or Qur'an; it is the seven oft-repeated and the great Qur'an. Al-Tirmidhī graded the report ḥasan and al-Ḥākim ṣaḥīḥ. DURR-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī reports reciting the Fātiḥa seven times as a healing spell for a scorpion sting; the chief recovered, and the Prophet approved the sheep payment and a share for himself. DURR-FULL (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy b. Kaʿb reports that God calls the Fātiḥa seven verses, beginning a division of three for God, three for the servant, and one shared between them. DURR-FULL (أم سلمة): Aisha reports that the Prophet counted the basmala as verse one, al-hamd as two, al-Rahman al-Rahim as three, Malik yawm al-din as four, then indicated five for the next verse. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Sabʿ al-Mathani is explained by the surah's seven verses, whose count is agreed; the only other seven-verse surah he knows is Arayta. ELMALILI (author): A bad intention, meaning an aim other than obedience and nearness to God, prevents an act from counting as worship. IBNASHUR (author): Repeating ‘You’ before seeking help marks a different restriction from worship: people may assist one another, as 5:2 commands, but only God is relied on for grave matters and counts as true aid. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): He also supports the sura's comprehensiveness by citing the sound report that al-Ikhlas counts as a third of the Qur'an because all its wording praises God. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): A proper name counts as third-person reference on both definitions, so the turn from God's name and attributes to إياك is iltifat for both schools. STUDYQURAN (Prophet Muhammad): The Prophet identifies the Fātiḥah as the greatest sūrah, calling it Praise be to God and the seven oft-repeated, and linking it to 15:87. STUDYQURAN (author): Another title, The Seven Oft-Repeated, is linked to 15:87."}, {"id": "1:5/q22/p3", "position": "The sūra is associated with Mecca.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN (بعض أهل مكة): Some Meccans read naʿbud with the dāl unvowelled. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض أهل مكة): Some Meccans read naʿbud with a quiescent dāl. ALUSI-FULL (بعض أهل مكة): Some Meccans read naʿbud with a silent final dāl; the majority use the standard open nūn and damma on dāl of the Hijaz. QUTB-ZILAL (author): Al-Fatiha is Meccan and has seven verses; Muslims recite it at least seventeen times daily, more with voluntary prayers, and may repeat it without limit."}, {"id": "1:5/q22/p4", "position": "The sūra is associated with Medina.", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): One view says half of al-Fatiha was revealed in Medina, apparently its second half, but the author says this view has no evidence. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The verse division differs by region: Medinans exclude the basmala and count “those You favored” as a verse; Meccans and Kufans include the basmala and combine that phrase with its verse; Hasan counts both separately. STUDYQURAN (author): Most scholars reject a Medinan origin because Muslims needed the sūrah to perform obligatory prayers."}, {"id": "1:5/q22/p5", "position": "The rejected view is challenged: the sūra's verse count and division are discussed.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Eight- or nine-verse counts are anomalous or a narrator's mistake; authorities differ over counting the basmala versus Anʿamta ʿalayhim, and the latter count's cadence objection is answered by a parallel in al-Nasr."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
