<<chunk 45, part 3 of 0..5>>
to God honors them in contrast with the other groups."}, {"id": "1:7/q03/p77", "position": "Al-Akhfash analyzes the accusative as an exception, but Ibn Mujāhid explicitly calls this mistaken; genitive غير is the adjective of الذين.", "reasons": "IBNMUJAHID reporting الأخفش: Al-Akhfash analyzes the accusative as an exception, but Ibn Mujāhid explicitly calls this mistaken; genitive غير is the adjective of الذين."}, {"id": "1:7/q03/p78", "position": "The suggestion that الذين denotes a generic class, allowing ghayr to modify it despite definiteness, undermines the rule that a definite noun is modified only by a definite; Abū Ḥayyān rejects this account.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN: The suggestion that الذين denotes a generic class, allowing ghayr to modify it despite definiteness, undermines the rule that a definite noun is modified only by a definite; Abū Ḥayyān rejects this account."}, {"id": "1:7/q03/p79", "position": "An omitted ṣirāṭ after ghayr is proposed, but this adjective analysis is weak because when an adjective and apposition coexist, the adjective ordinarily comes first; ghayr can instead modify ṣirāṭ alladhīna.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: An omitted ṣirāṭ after ghayr is proposed, but this adjective analysis is weak because when an adjective and apposition coexist, the adjective ordinarily comes first; ghayr can instead modify ṣirāṭ alladhīna."}]}
{"id": "1:7/q04", "question": "Who are those whom God favored?", "turns_on": "Whether the words include every obedient recipient of guidance or single out prophets, believers, earlier communities, or the Prophet's circle; 4:69 is repeatedly cited.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q04/p1", "position": "Believers or Muslims", "reasons": "TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, in a report through Ibn Jurayj, identifies the favored as believers. TAB reporting وكيع: Wakīʿ identifies the favored as Muslims. IBNABIHATIM reporting مجاهد: Mujahid identifies those favored as the believers. SULAMI reporting ابن عطاء: The blessed are knowers granted knowledge, saints granted sincerity, contentment, and certainty, the righteous granted patience and compassion, seekers granted obedience's sweetness, and believers granted steadfastness. MAWARDI-FULL reporting وكيع: He identifies those favored as Muslims. KASHSHAF: Those blessed are the believers. KASHSHAF-FULL: Those blessed are believers, and the wording leaves blessing general because Islam gathers every blessing. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Another statement from Ibn ʿAbbas says the favored are believers. RAZI-FULL: The verse divides people into the obedient who are favored, sinners under wrath, and those ignorant of religion or unbelievers who are astray. NASAFI-FULL: “The path of those You favored” is an appositive restating the straight path, both reinforcing the point and identifying it as the Muslims' path; this emphatically attests to its uprightness. ABUHAYYAN reporting وكيع: Wakīʿ identifies those favored as Muslims. IBNKATHIR reporting وكيع: Wakiʿ identifies those favored as Muslims. BURSEVI: Calling the path that of people God favored, rather than people killed or punished, softens the demand and invites believers toward prophetic and saintly states. ALUSI reporting قيل: One view identifies those blessed as believers in general. TABATABAI reporting علي: Ali says the blessed are those favored with success in religion and obedience, not merely wealth or health, since disbelievers and sinners may also enjoy those worldly gifts. | mentions 4:69"}, {"id": "1:7/q04/p2", "position": "Prophets", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Those granted favor are the prophets, whom God favored with prophethood. | mentions 19:58 TAB reporting الربيع: Al-Rabīʿ says the favored are the prophets. TAB reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد: ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd says the favored are the Prophet and those with him. MAWARDI reporting unattributed: Another view identifies those favored as the prophets. DAMGHANI: Niʿmah can mean prophethood, as in the people favored with prophecy. | mentions 4:69, 93:11 BAGHAWI-FULL reporting عكرمة: Ikrima says those favored were granted guidance and steadfastness in faith and right conduct, and identifies them as the prophets. BAYDAWI: One interpretation identifies those blessed with the prophets. IBNKATHIR reporting الربيع بن أنس: Al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas, through Abu Jaʿfar, identifies those favored as the prophets. DURR reporting قتادة: In Qatada's sequential gloss, the Day of Recompense is when creatures are repaid; the worship-prayer is what people should say and directs them to God; the straight path is named, the favored are prophets, the objects of anger are Jews, and the astray are Christians. DURR reporting أبو زيد: Abū Zayd identifies those favored as the Prophet and those with him. DURR reporting الربيع بن أنس: Al-Rabīʿ b. Anas identifies the favored as prophets, those under wrath as Jews, and the astray as Christians. DURR-FULL reporting الربيع بن أنس: Al-Rabi ibn Anas identifies the favored as prophets, those under anger as Jews, and the astray as Christians. IBNASHUR-FULL: The favored are recipients of complete blessing, especially earlier messengers and prophets; substitution shows that guidance itself is a blessing and the fully blessed were guided. IBNASHUR-FULL: Whether the favored are prophets, their best followers, or earlier Muslims, the prayer asks for complete guidance as appropriate to each era's attained and un attained guidance. ASAD-NOTES: The blessed are those given prophetic guidance and enabled to benefit from it. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT: A present-tense blessing would omit the earlier prophets and righteous, imply no established past recipients, and obscure continuity in one path from Adam onward."}, {"id": "1:7/q04/p3", "position": "Prophets, truthful people, martyrs, righteous people, and sometimes angels and all obedient worshippers", "reasons": "TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, transmitted through al-Ḍaḥḥāk, identifies the favored as obedient worshippers among the angels, prophets, truthful, martyrs, and righteous. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says those favored include obedient worshippers among angels, prophets, the truthful, martyrs, and righteous. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas identifies those favored as obedient angels, prophets, truthful ones, and martyrs who worshipped God. MAWARDI-FULL: Those favored are variously identified as angels, prophets, believers in earlier scriptures, Muslims, or Muhammad and his Companions. TABRISI: The favored people are those who obey God and the Messenger, as identified in the verse listing prophets, the truthful, martyrs, and righteous. | mentions 4:69 IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās identifies those favored by God as the prophets, truthful, martyrs, and righteous. RAZI-FULL: The verse means asking for the path of those favored; 4:69 identifies them as prophets and the truthful, whose chief is Abu Bakr, so it supports his imamate and the propriety of following him. | mentions 4:69 DURR reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās identifies the favored path as that of obedient worshippers among angels, prophets, the truthful, martyrs, and righteous. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas identifies those favored as obedient angels, prophets, truthful ones, martyrs, and righteous people. TABATABAI: The blessed are those who obey God and the Messenger: prophets, truthful ones, martyrs, and righteous people, described by complete outward and inward submission. | mentions 4:69, 4:65, 4:66 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT: The past tense in You blessed identifies established recipients, including prophets, truthful ones, martyrs, and righteous people. | mentions 4:69"}, {"id": "1:7/q04/p4", "position": "The Prophet's Companions", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد: He identifies those favored as Muhammad and the Companions with him. IBNATIYYA reporting الحسن بن أبي الحسن: Al-Ḥasan identifies the favored people as the Companions of Muḥammad. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الحسن بن أبي الحسن: Al-Hasan ibn Abi al-Hasan identifies the favored as the Companions of Muhammad. BAYDAWI: Another interpretation identifies those blessed with the Prophet Muhammad and his companions. ABUHAYYAN reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan identifies those favored as the Companions of the Prophet. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Ḥasan identifies the favored people as the Companions of Muḥammad. ALUSI reporting قيل: Another view identifies those blessed as the Companions of Muḥammad. STUDYQURAN: Those God blessed are identified in 4:69 as prophets, truthful ones, witnesses, and righteous people, excellent companions. | mentions 4:69"}, {"id": "1:7/q04/p5", "position": "Faithful followers of Moses and Jesus before their religion changed", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās says those given favor were the people of Moses and Jesus before they changed God's blessings. WAHIDI-QT: Those favored with guidance are the people of Moses and Jesus before they changed God's favor. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Those granted favor are the followers of Moses and Jesus before they changed God's favor. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas identifies those blessed as Moses's companions before they changed their religion; another view identifies them as prophets. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting فرقة من المفسرين: A group of exegetes says the favored are the believers among the Children of Israel, citing God's address to Israel in 2:40, 2:47, and 2:122. | mentions 2:40, 2:47, 2:122 IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas also identifies the favored as Moses' followers before they changed their religion; the author says this matches the previous interpretation. BAYDAWI-FULL: The favored are variously identified as prophets; the Prophet and his Companions; or the uncorrupted, un-abrogated followers of Moses and Jesus. NASAFI-FULL: Those favored are the believers and prophets, or the people of Moses before they changed. ABUHAYYAN: Among the proposed referents of those favored are prophets, angels
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
