<<chunk 49, part 1 of 0..5>>
صاحب الحجة: The author of al-Ḥujja says genitive ghayr is either apposition or adjective; apposition implies repeating the governing factor, as the repeated prepositions in 7:75 show. | mentions 7:75 WAHIDI-BASIT reporting صاحب الحجة: As apposition, ghayr has a clear meaning whether construed definite or indefinite, since both definite and indefinite apposition are accepted. WAHIDI-BASIT: Lā may also be added after ghayr as a circumstantial expression, adjective, or appositive; the Qur'an uses it in 57:29. | mentions 57:29 KASHSHAF: Ghayr can be appositive to those blessed, meaning they are spared God's anger and error. IBNATIYYA reporting أبو علي: On the genitive reading, ghayr can be an appositive to الذين or an adjective to an indefinite, since الذين here is not specifically singled out. TABRISI: In the genitive, ghayr may be an apposition to the pronoun in ʿalayhim or to alladhīna, or an adjective of the relative phrase despite ghayr usually modifying an indefinite noun. QURTUBI reporting عمر بن الخطاب وأبي بن كعب: Umar and Ubayy read ghayr with accusative or genitive r; genitive parses as apposition or adjective, with two explanations for its definiteness, attributed respectively to al-Farisi and al-Zamakhshari. QURTUBI-FULL: The genitive may make ghayr an appositive to alladhina or to the pronoun in alayhim, or an adjective; although definite nouns usually are not modified by indefinite ones, alladhina is general here or ghayr is definite between exclusive opposites. BAYDAWI: Ghayr can be an appositive to those blessed, or an adjective that clarifies or restricts them. BAYDAWI-FULL: “Not those angered nor astray” may be an apposition to “those You favored,” or a qualifying description showing that true favor joins faith with safety from anger and error. NASAFI: ‘Other than those under anger, nor those astray’ can be an apposition to ‘those favored’ or an adjective describing them; they unite the full blessing of faith with safety from anger and error. NASAFI-FULL: “Other than those under anger” is an appositive: those favored are the ones spared God's anger and misguidance. ABUHAYYAN reporting أبو علي: Abū ʿAlī parses genitive ghayr as an apposition either to الذين or to the pronoun in عليهم; Abū Ḥayyān calls both analyses weak because apposition by an adjective is weak. ABUHAYYAN: Some supply an omitted صراط before ghayr; Abū Ḥayyān finds the estimate weak because it creates awkward apposition or adjective order and other difficult attachment analyses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting أبو علي: Abū ʿAlī analyzes the genitive as an apposition to “those” or to the pronoun in “upon them,” but Abū Ḥayyān says both are weak because “ghayr” is adjectival. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Supplying an omitted “path” before “ghayr” yields weak analyses, including an adjective before its apposition or repeated apposition. SAMIN-DURR: Ghayr is an indefinite apposition to alladhīna; calling it an adjective is difficult because ghayr is indefinite and the relative is definite. SAMIN-DURR: An omitted ṣirāṭ after ghayr is proposed, but this adjective analysis is weak because when an adjective and apposition coexist, the adjective ordinarily comes first; ghayr can instead modify ṣirāṭ alladhīna. SAMIN-DURR: Accusative ghayr may also replace either ṣirāṭ, despite a possible repeated-apposition problem, or serve as a circumstantial from either one. ALUSI: Ghayr is a matching apposition to alladhīna. Making it an apposition to the pronoun in ʿalayhim is semantically awkward; the relative clause still contains its pronoun because the antecedent is not truly discarded. ALUSI: The objection from 35:37 does not disprove this definiteness: ṣāliḥan may be a fronted circumstantial accusative, or ghayr alladhī may be an apposition to it. | mentions 35:37 ALUSI-FULL: “Other than those who incurred anger” is a complete appositive for “those whom You favored”; taking it as an appositive for their pronoun is semantically awkward, though the relative clause remains grammatically attached. IBNASHUR reporting القراء العشرة: All ten readers pronounce ghayr in the genitive; syntactically it may modify the favored or stand in apposition, with the author preferring the adjectival reading. IBNASHUR: He prefers treating ghayr as an adjective: its descriptive sense outweighs apposition, which conventionally names the same entity as its antecedent."}, {"id": "1:7/q14/p3", "position": "Ghayr is an exception, possibly disconnected", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: He adduces 21:22 as a parallel in which إلا الله is understood adjectivally, like non-exceptive ghayr. | mentions 21:22 SIBAWAYH: Dhu al-Rumma's line uses إلا بغامها descriptively in place of غير بغامها, demonstrating a non-exceptive use of إلا. AKHFASH reporting قوم: Some readers construe ghayr al-maghḍūbi as an exception outside the initial statement. TAB reporting نحويو الكوفة: Kufan grammarians reject an unmotivated added lā at the start of a phrase and reject coordinating it with ghayr if ghayr means “other than” or an exception. TAB-FULL reporting بعض نحويي البصريين: One Basran grammarian takes accusative ghayr as an exception from those favored: exclude those not favored or guided, and do not make us among them. TAB-FULL: He prefers the Kufan analysis: lā cannot begin as an omitted negative or coordinate with other than or an exception; since ghayr can mean exception, negation, or other than, the only valid reading here is negation, making the verse ask to avoid both groups. ZAJJAJ: Accusative ghayr can be an exception, equivalent to “except the angered”; exception ghayr is accusative when what follows illā is accusative. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting الفراء: Al-Farrāʾ rejects accusative ghayr as an exception, arguing that a positive exception cannot be followed by negative lā in coordination. WAHIDI-BASIT: The identification also fits a rare accusative reading of ghayr as exception, excluding Jews and Christians from those favored; the author notes that this reading is anomalous. BAYDAWI: Other parses take an implied aʿnī, or treat ghayr as an exception if blessings include both groups. ABUHAYYAN reporting الأخفش والزجاج: Al-Akhfash and al-Zajjāj allow accusative ghayr as a disconnected exception because the preceding wording does not include those who are astray; some readers reject this analysis because of lā. ABUHAYYAN: Some permit accusative ghayr as an exception by treating lā as extra, since they say lā is extra only after prior negation; they cite Qurʾanic and poetic examples, while other grammarians take lā as genuinely negative. IBNKATHIR reporting بعض النحاة: Some grammarians take ghayr as an exception, making it a disconnected exception because the angered are outside the favored group; Ibn Kathir says his own account is better. BIQAI: Ghayr conveys negation rather than an exception: the wording excludes those characterized by the trait from the outset and avoids suggesting a merely lesser class. BIQAI-FULL: Using غير rather than an exception marks exclusion from the outset, making clear that the requested universal blessing means the special honor granted to the faithful, not the general gift of existence. ITQAN reporting الراغب: Raghib says غير can mean “except,” allowing it to mark an exception or describe an indefinite noun. | mentions 2:163, 35:3 ALUSI reporting الفراء: Al-Farrāʾ rejects the exception analysis because ghayr then means siwā and the negative lā cannot be coordinated with it unless lā is treated as extra; al-Ālūsī notes the usage after wāw is unattested. | mentions 7:12 ALUSI-FULL reporting الأخفش: Al-Akhfash allows the accusative as a connected or disconnected exception if “favor” is broad; al-Farraʾ forbids joining negative lā to an exceptive phrase meaning “other than.”"}, {"id": "1:7/q14/p4", "position": "Ghayr is an accusative circumstantial phrase", "reasons": "AKHFASH: Ghayr may alternatively be accusative as a circumstantial expression because it is indefinite while its antecedent is definite. ZAJJAJ: Accusative ghayr can instead be a circumstantial, meaning the path of those blessed, not angered. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ghayr may instead be accusative as a circumstantial expression or an exception meaning except those under wrath; as a circumstantial phrase it means not those under wrath. KASHSHAF reporting النبي وعمر بن الخطاب وابن كثير: The accusative ghayra is a circumstantial reading attributed to the Prophet, Umar, and Ibn Kathir. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم وعمر بن الخطاب: A circumstantial accusative reading of ghayr is attributed to the Prophet and Umar, and also reported from Ibn Kathir. IBNATIYYA reporting أبو علي: On the accusative reading, ghayr can be circumstantial, exceptive, or an implied direct object of “I mean.” QURTUBI: Accusative ghayr can be circumstantial or an exception; al-Khalil also permits an implied “I mean.” QURTUBI-FULL reporting الخليل: The accusative may be circumstantial, exceptive, or understood as “I mean,” a construction attributed to al-Khalil. SAMIN-DURR: Ghayr is also read in the accusative as a circumstantial from alladhīna or ʿalayhim, or as a disjoint exception; al-Farrāʾ rejects the latter because lā lacks a preceding negation. IBNKATHIR reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari reports an accusative circumstantial reading of ghayr, attributed to the Prophet and ʿUmar and also transmitted from Ibn Kathir; its circumstantial referent is the pronoun in ʿalayhim. ITQAN: غير can function as a circumstantial accusative where “not” fits, or as an exception where “except” fits; as an exception it takes the case of the following noun in the corresponding construction. ALUSI reporting عمر بن الخطاب: ʿUmar read ghayra in the accusative; a noncanonical report attributes the same reading to Ibn Kathīr. It is best parsed as a circumstantial accusative governed by anʿamta, though other analyses are discussed. ALUSI reporting الخليل: Al-Khalīl parses the accusative as governed by an omitted verb, aʿnī, and al-Ālūsī endorses him: exception is pro
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
