<<chunk 49, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:7/q14", "question": "How is 'other than those angered' construed and inflected?", "turns_on": "The case reading, whether ghayr is definite, and whether lā can follow an exception.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q14/p1", "position": "Ghayr is an adjective qualifying the favored", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: Sībawayh analyzes ghayr in 1:7 as an adjective meaning other than, not as an exceptive construction. SIBAWAYH: Amr ibn Maʿdīkarib's verse is paraphrased as كل أخ غير الفرقدين, with the ghayr phrase qualifying كل. SIBAWAYH: Al-Shammākh's verse gives another poetic example of a ghayr phrase qualifying a noun, rather than forming an exception. SIBAWAYH: He cites 4:95, غير أولي الضرر, as another Quranic example of ghayr used as an adjective. | mentions 4:95 SIBAWAYH: In another Labīd line, the second ghayr is an adjective for the first; the intended point is that events cannot alter the sharp sword. FARRA: Genitive ghayri is an adjective of alladhīna, not of the pronoun in ʿalayhim; its definite annexation permits this description because neither expression denotes a specified person. AKHFASH: Ghayr al-maghḍūbi can be an adjective for those blessed, though ghayr and mithl are ordinarily used with indefinites and can modify definite forms that carry an indefinite sense. TAB: On one parsing, ghayr is an adjective of alladhīna: the relative phrase is not a specific proper-name-like definite, so an indefinite adjective can describe it. TAB: The possible accusative parse treats ghayr as a detached adjective of the pronoun in ʿalayhim, which is syntactically governed by anʿamta. TAB-FULL: The first genitive parse makes ghayr an adjective for alladhīna: the relative phrase is not a fully specified proper name but indefinite-like, so it can take this adjective. TAB-FULL: Even if ghayr repeats ṣirāṭ rather than qualifying those favored, their evident description as guided by God already implies they are neither objects of His anger nor astray. TAB-FULL: An accusative reading of ghayr is grammatically possible but al-Ṭabarī dislikes it because it departs from the established, widely transmitted reading; it would qualify the object pronoun in عليهم and mean not objects of anger or misguidance. TAB-FULL: He prefers the universally transmitted genitive reading, taking ghayr as an adjective of those favored or as repeated ṣirāṭ; either parse is sound, and he explains the grammatical alternatives because they produce different interpretations. ZAJJAJ: Alternatively, genitive ghayr qualifies alladhīna; although ghayr usually describes an indefinite noun, alladhīna here denotes a category rather than particular people. IBNMUJAHID reporting نافع وعاصم وأبو عمرو وابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي: These readers take غير المغضوب عليهم in the genitive as an adjective of الذين; Ibn Kathīr is reported with a different form, though another transmission agrees with the majority. IBNMUJAHID reporting الخليل بن أحمد: Al-Khalīl permits Ibn Kathīr’s form as a detached adjective or as an accusative circumstantial phrase; he also allows repeating صراط before غير. IBNMUJAHID reporting الأخفش: Al-Akhfash analyzes the accusative as an exception, but Ibn Mujāhid explicitly calls this mistaken; genitive غير is the adjective of الذين. THALABI: Ghayr functions as an adjective for alladhīna despite the usual definiteness mismatch, because alladhīna here is not a fully specified definite but means whoever is truthful rather than lying. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting صاحب الحجة: As an adjective, ghayr can modify alladhīna here only because the relative phrase does not single out a particular group, making it like an indefinite description. WAHIDI-BASIT: In 4:95, ghayr can modify the believers sitting out: the intended contrast is healthy nonparticipants versus those who strive. | mentions 4:95 KASHSHAF: Ghayr can modify the definite relative phrase because it is undelimited and the angry and astray are opposites of the blessed. KASHSHAF: Alternatively, ghayr is an adjective: the blessed combine faith with safety from anger and error. KASHSHAF-FULL: Ghayr al-maghḍūb may substitute for those blessed, describing them as safe from anger and error, or qualify them as combining faith with safety from both. KASHSHAF-FULL: Ghayr can qualify the definite phrase because alladhina is not temporally delimited and the contrary identities of the two groups remove its ambiguity; it can also be accusative as a circumstantial phrase. IBNATIYYA: He explains that Ibn al-Sarrāj preserves الذين as definite and permits a definite adjective, while others treat ghayr as indefinite and approximate الذين to a general noun. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Abu Bakr keeps alladhina definite and allows ghayr to describe it because context makes ghayr definite; other grammarians treat alladhina as a common, near-indefinite term and allow an indefinite adjective. TABRISI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjaj allows ghayr as an adjective of alladhīna because the relative phrase does not target named individuals, much like a generic man like you. TABRISI reporting أبو بكر السراج: In the accusative, ghayr may be a circumstantial qualifier, a disconnected exception, or an explanatory specification meaning 'I mean'. BAYDAWI: The adjective reading works by treating the relative phrase as an indefinite, or by making ghayr definite through its contrastive genitive. BAYDAWI reporting ابن كثير: Ibn Kathīr reads ghayr in the accusative as a circumstantial qualifier of the pronoun in ʿalayhim, governed by anʿamta. BAYDAWI-FULL: The adjective-like reading is possible if the relative is treated as indefinite or if غير becomes definite by annexation to the unique opposite group. BAYDAWI-FULL reporting ابن كثير: Ibn Kathīr reads غير in the accusative as a circumstantial qualifier or by an implied verb, and it can also be an exception if favors include both groups. NASAFI: Although ghayr normally does not become definite through annexation, it can modify the definite alladhina here: between opposites it takes definiteness, and both terms are generic yet partly specified, balancing their ambiguity and particularity. NASAFI-FULL: Alternatively, the phrase qualifies the favored, who combine the full blessing of faith with safety from divine anger and error; the source explains why “other than” can qualify a definite antecedent. ABUHAYYAN: Ghayr is always masculine singular; it expresses difference in some respect, originates as an adjective, can mark exception, and remains annexed. It cannot take al and does not ordinarily become definite by annexation. ABUHAYYAN reporting سيبويه: Sībawayh parses genitive ghayr as an adjective, treating it as definite through annexation to عليهم; Ibn al-Sarrāj offers a different account of its definiteness. ABUHAYYAN: The suggestion that الذين denotes a generic class, allowing ghayr to modify it despite definiteness, undermines the rule that a definite noun is modified only by a definite; Abū Ḥayyān rejects this account. ABUHAYYAN reporting المهدوي: Al-Mahdawī and others parse accusative ghayr as a circumstantial accusative from عليهم, or from الذين; Abū Ḥayyān rejects the latter because the genitive complement has no syntactic position for a circumstantial modifier. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: “Ghayr” is originally an adjective, can mark exception, must be annexed, and cannot take the definite article or become definite merely through annexation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting سيبويه: Sībawayh permits the genitive as an adjective, taking “ghayr” as definite through annexation; Abū Ḥayyān also reports Ibn al-Sarrāj’s narrower rationale and rejects a generic-plural rationale. SAMIN-DURR: Ghayr can function like illā for exception, as an adjective by analogy with illā, or like lā for negation, permitting its governed object to precede it. IBNKATHIR: The Nabigha al-Dhubyani line illustrates omitting the described noun and retaining its adjective; here “path” is omitted before “other than the angered.” IBNKATHIR reporting الجمهور: The majority read ghayr in the genitive as an adjective modifying the path. NASHR reporting ابن كثير: Khalil transmits from Ibn Kathir accusative ghayra al-maghḍūb, judged sound as a circumstantial phrase or adjective. BIQAI: Ghayr is made definite by annexation to its opposite and serves as an adjective for those who were blessed, like motion being other than rest. ITQAN: غير is an annexed, indefinite noun; it becomes definite only between two opposites, which permits it to modify the definite phrase “those who incurred anger,” though it usually modifies an indefinite. ITQAN: In 4:95, غير is read nominative as an adjective to “those who sit,” or as an exception/substitute; accusative as an exception; and, outside the seven readings, genitive as an adjective to “believers.” | mentions 4:95 ALUSI: Treating ghayr as an adjective meaning different is weak: ghayr has become a noun and usually does not modify an expressed noun. ALUSI reporting سيبويه: Sībawayh analyzes ghayr as an explanatory or restrictive adjective of alladhīna; al-Ālūsī explains that the relative is definite generically but can function like an indefinite when only an unspecified subset is intended. ALUSI-FULL reporting سيبويه: Sibawayh treats ghayr as an explanatory or restrictive adjective of “those”; Alusi argues the partly specified group can function like an indefinite despite the relative phrase's definiteness. IBNASHUR-FULL: All ten readers put ghayr in the genitive; it can modify the favored people or stand as a substitute, with no difference in intended meaning."}, {"id": "1:7/q14/p2", "position": "Ghayr is an apposition to the favored or an understood path", "reasons": "NAHHAS reporting ابن كيسان: Ibn Kaysān permits ghayr al-maghḍūbi as an adjective or apposition to alladhīna, and also as apposition to their pronoun in ʿalayhim. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ghayr can be genitive as an appositive to alladhīna or as its adjective; the adjective is valid because the relative phrase here is not a particular, singled-out group. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
