<<chunk 50, part 2 of 0..4>>
RPUSCORANICUM reporting Nöldeke: On the hypothesis that the Fātiḥa draws on Christian traditions, Nöldeke’s reading takes the second group as Jews, stereotyped in Christian polemic as subject to divine wrath. CORPUSCORANICUM: Identifying the wrath-stricken with Jews would be anachronistic for the Fātiḥa’s first proclamation: this image appears only in Medina and never becomes a Quranic stereotype. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Some reports identify the strayed as Christians and those under wrath as Jews; the author says these are nearby examples in time and place, not an exhaustive identification. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The angered precede the astray because they know truth and reject it, are more culpable than the ignorant, and Jews preceded Christians; an authentic hadith identifies the groups accordingly. STUDYQURAN: A prophetic saying, not considered highly authentic, identifies those under wrath as Jews and those astray as Christians. | mentions 2:61, 2:90, 3:112, 5:60, 5:77"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p2", "position": "People who know the truth yet disobey in outward conduct", "reasons": "TAB: Recounting punishments for disobedience warns people away from sin and from incurring God's anger, whose consequences lead to destruction. THALABI reporting قوم: One group explains God's anger as His will to take vengeance on sinners. THALABI reporting قيل: A third explanation defines anger as condemnation of sinners for the ugliness of their acts. BAGHAWI: “Not those angered” means a path other than that of those God wills to punish for disobedience. BAGHAWI-FULL: Those under wrath are people whose path incurred God’s anger; divine anger is the will to punish sinners, but does not befall sinful believers, only disbelievers. KASHSHAF: God's anger is His will to avenge sinners and punish them, acting as a king does when angry with a subordinate. KASHSHAF-FULL: God's anger means His will to take vengeance on sinners, punish them, and treat them as a king does those under his authority. RAZI-FULL: Connection with purified spirits increases strength, while connection with evil spirits brings failure and deprivation; Razi identifies those under wrath as immoral people and the astray as unbelievers. RAZI-FULL: A broader reading takes those under wrath as people who err in outward deeds, including sinners, and those astray as people who err in belief; the wording is general and should not be restricted without cause. RAZI-FULL: The verse divides people into the obedient who are favored, sinners under wrath, and those ignorant of religion or unbelievers who are astray. RAZI-FULL: Those with complete favor unite knowledge of truth for its own sake with doing good for its own sake; lacking practice makes sinners under wrath, while lacking knowledge makes people astray. | mentions 4:93, 10:32 BAYDAWI: Bayḍāwī also finds apt a general reading: sinners fail in action and incur wrath, while those ignorant of God fail in understanding and go astray. BAYDAWI-FULL: A further interpretation calls deliberate sinners angered and those ignorant of God astray: failure of action is impiety, while failure of understanding is error. | mentions 4:93 ALUSI reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī explains God’s anger as His will to punish sinners, bringing punishment upon them as an angry king does to subjects under his authority. ALUSI-FULL reporting الكشاف: Al-Zamakhshari explains God's anger as His will to exact vengeance and punish sinners, acting as an angry ruler acts toward a subordinate. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The closing description covers all accountable people: the favored know and follow truth, the angered know but oppose it (some exegetes call them sinners), and the astray do not know it. | mentions 18:103, 18:104"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p3", "position": "Unbelievers", "reasons": "THALABI: God's anger does not reach sinful believers; it reaches unbelievers. BAGHAWI: God's anger does not befall sinful believers; it befalls only disbelievers. RAZI-FULL: Razi also offers a possible reading in which those under wrath are unbelievers and those astray are hypocrites, following the order of groups in the opening of al-Baqara. | mentions 2:6, 2:8 BURHAN: In الذين أنعمت عليهم غير المغضوب عليهم, غضب is the single opposite of blessing: the first group is believers and the second disbelievers. ALUSI reporting الرازي: Al-Rāzī suggests that those under anger are unbelievers and the astray are hypocrites, analogizing to al-Baqara’s order of believers, unbelievers, and hypocrites; al-Ālūsī rejects the analogy against the Prophetic report. | mentions 2:1, 2:6, 2:8 ELMALILI: Qur'an also attributes divine wrath to disbelievers generally and describes those who reject God's way as far astray, supporting the comprehensive reading. | mentions 16:106 STUDYQURAN: The verse prays to follow those whom God elevates in belief, knowledge, and uncorrupted faith, and to avoid disbelievers, some astray and some under wrath. | mentions 6:83, 58:11, 6:82"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p4", "position": "People of innovation", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Anger follows innovations, while error is abandoning guidance and Sunnah, including the Sunnah of saying Amin aloud after the chapter in prayer. THALABI reporting التستري: Al-Tustarī identifies innovation with those angered and departure from Sunna with those astray. BAGHAWI reporting سهل بن عبد الله: Sahl ibn ʿAbd Allah says those angered are people of innovation. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting سهل بن عبد الله: Sahl b. Abd Allah interprets those under wrath as innovators and the straying ones as people departing from the Sunnah. QURTUBI-FULL: Another view calls innovators recipients of wrath and those who leave the sunnas astray; the author says this is good, though the Prophet’s interpretation is best."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p5", "position": "Those abandoned and deprived of divine nearness", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting ابن عطاء: Those under anger are abandoned, expelled, and humiliated; the astray have left God's guidance, knowledge, and guardianship. SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Those under anger are consumed in Satan's wastelands; the astray are expelled from obedience to the Merciful. SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Anger is linked with ostentation, and error with abandoning Sunnah in the pillars of worship. QUSHAYRI: Those under wrath are struck by abandonment, deprivation, rejection, separation, and expulsion."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p6", "position": "The two genitive parses have nearly the same implication: those truly favored with guidance to the true religion are not under God's anger and are not astray.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The two genitive parses have nearly the same implication: those truly favored with guidance to the true religion are not under God's anger and are not astray."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p7", "position": "Even if ghayr repeats ṣirāṭ rather than qualifying those favored, their evident description as guided by God already implies they are neither objects of His anger nor astray.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Even if ghayr repeats ṣirāṭ rather than qualifying those favored, their evident description as guided by God already implies they are neither objects of His anger nor astray."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p8", "position": "Those under anger are the people God describes as cursed and punished in Qur'an 5:60; He informs believers of their fate and shows them the route to salvation out of mercy.; cited verses: 5:60", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Those under anger are the people God describes as cursed and punished in Qur'an 5:60; He informs believers of their fate and shows them the route to salvation out of mercy. | mentions 5:60"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p9", "position": "With genitive ghayr, one analysis makes it a substitute for alladhīna, yielding “the path of those other than the angered.”", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: With genitive ghayr, one analysis makes it a substitute for alladhīna, yielding “the path of those other than the angered.”"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p10", "position": "Accusative ghayr can instead be a circumstantial, meaning the path of those blessed, not angered.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Accusative ghayr can instead be a circumstantial, meaning the path of those blessed, not angered."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p11", "position": "Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’", "reasons": "THALABI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p12", "position": "Al-Wāqidī glosses those angered as people who oppose and disobey, and those astray as people who leave religion and faith.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting الواقدي: Al-Wāqidī glosses those angered as people who oppose and disobey, and those astray as people who leave religion and faith."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p13", "position": "Ghayr can be appositive to those blessed, meaning they are spared God's anger and error.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF: Ghayr can be appositive to those blessed, meaning they are spared God's anger and error."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p14", "position": "Ghayr al-maghḍūb may substitute for those blessed, describing them as safe from anger and error, or qualify them as combining faith with safety from both.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: Ghayr al-maghḍūb may substitute for those blessed, describing them as safe from anger and error, or qualify them as combining faith with safety from both."}, {"id": "1:7/q16/p15", "position": "Abu ʿAli explains fatḥa as circumstantial (“not in a state of being angered”), exceptional (“except those angered”), or an implied “I mean”; al-Khalil is reported to agree.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting أبو علي: Abu ʿAli explains fatḥa as circumstantial (“not in a state of being angered”), exceptional (“except those angered”), or an implied “I mean”; al-Khalil i
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
