<<chunk 50, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "1:7/q16", "question": "Who are those under anger?", "turns_on": "Whether the Prophetic identifications specify the only referents or exemplify wider classes of disobedience and error.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q16/p1", "position": "The Jews, as an identified example or restricted referent", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The people under divine anger are the Jews, whom God turned into apes and pigs; the requested path is other than their religion. ABDURRAZZAQ reporting النبي: The Prophet points to Jews as those under divine anger, in response to a question at Wādī al-Qurā. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Those under wrath are the Jews. TAB reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: In reports from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, the Prophet identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: At the siege of Wādī al-Qurā, the Prophet answers a man's question by identifying the besieged Jews as the wrathful. TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, through al-Ḍaḥḥāk, identifies the wrathful as Jews whom God has angered. TAB reporting أبو مالك، أبو صالح، ابن عباس، مرة الهمداني، ابن مسعود، وناس من أصحاب النبي: A report collected by al-Suddī from several early authorities identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting مجاهد: Mujāhid identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting الربيع: Al-Rabīʿ identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, in a report through Ibn Jurayj, identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد: ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting زيد: Zayd, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd's father, identifies the wrathful as the Jews. TAB reporting ابن عباس: In Ibn ʿAbbās's explanation, the prayer asks God to inspire true monotheistic religion, spare the worshippers His anger like the Jews, and keep them from Christian error and punishment. TAB: Jews and Christians are both astray and under wrath; God labels each group by a real, recognizable trait, without implying that it lacks the other's blameworthy traits. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن عدي بن حاتم: The Prophet identifies those under wrath as the Jews in reports transmitted from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن عبد الله بن شقيق: Reports from the Prophet at the siege of Wādī al-Qurā identify the besieged people under wrath as Jews. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses those under wrath as Jews whom God has been angry with. TAB-FULL reporting السدي عن أبي مالك وأبي صالح عن ابن عباس ومرة الهمداني عن ابن مسعود وناس من أصحاب النبي: The report attributed through al-Suddī to these early authorities identifies those under wrath as Jews. TAB-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujāhid identifies those under wrath as Jews. TAB-FULL reporting ربيع: Rabīʿ says those under wrath are the Jews. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd says those under wrath are the Jews; he also transmits the same identification from his father. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses the astray as Christians whom God led astray through their fabrication about Him; the prayer asks for the true monotheistic faith, protection from Jewish wrath and Christian error, and mercy to prevent their punishment. TAB-FULL: Both Jews and Christians are astray and under wrath, but God labels each by a true, recognizable characteristic, without listing every blameworthy trait of either group. TAB-FULL reporting بعض أهل الغباء من القدرية: Some Qadariyyah wrongly infer from calling Christians astray and Jews objects of wrath that human acts belong only to people and that God does not cause their misguidance; al-Ṭabarī says this betrays ignorance of Arabic attribution and the many verses naming God as guide and misguider. | mentions 10:22, 45:23 IBNABIHATIM reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet identifies those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; the author says exegetes do not disagree on this wording. IBNABIHATIM: The author says he knows no disagreement among exegetes over the identification of those astray as Christians and those under wrath as Jews. IBNABIHATIM reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: A second report from the Prophet likewise says the Jews incurred wrath and the Christians went astray. THALABI reporting رسول الله: In a report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, the Prophet identifies those angered with the Jews and those astray with the Christians. THALABI reporting رسول الله: At Wādī al-Qurā, the Prophet points to Jews fighting him as those angered and to Christians as the other party, those astray. THALABI: The author links divine anger against Jews to 5:60 and the description of Christians as astray to 5:77. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 MAWARDI: God singles out Jews as the objects of wrath because they are the most hostile. MAWARDI reporting عدي بن حاتم: Adi ibn Hatim reports that the Prophet identified those under wrath as Jews and those astray as Christians; al-Mawardi says all exegetes agree. MAWARDI: Al-Mawardi says all exegetes agree that those under wrath are Jews and those astray are Christians. MAWARDI-FULL reporting عدي بن حاتم: He asked the Prophet who the angered and astray groups were; the Prophet identified them as Jews and Christians, respectively, as all exegetes agree. MAWARDI-FULL: Misguidance is the opposite of guidance, and Jews are singled out for anger because they are more intensely hostile. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting عدي بن حاتم: A report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, attributed to the Prophet, identifies those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; no grading is stated. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting النبي: A second report says the Prophet at Wādī al-Qurā was asked by a man from Bali about two groups; he pointed to Jews as those under wrath and Christians as astray; no grading is stated. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting ابن عباس وابن مسعود ومجاهد وغيرهم: Commentators support this interpretation by citing God's anger against Jews in 5:60 and the description of people who strayed in 5:77; Ibn ʿAbbās, Ibn Masʿūd, and Mujāhid hold it. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 WAHIDI-QT: Those under wrath are Jews; God's wrath means His willing punishment. WAHIDI-QT: Those astray are Christians, and Muslims ask to avoid both their error and the Jews' incurred wrath. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Those under divine anger are the Jews; God's anger means His willing punishment. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The people who went astray are the Christians; Muslims ask to avoid their deviation from truth as well as the Jews' incurred anger. BAGHAWI reporting عمر بن الخطاب: ʿUmar read “the path of those whom You favored,” and Baghawi links this to verses describing the Jews as recipients of anger and a people who strayed. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 BAGHAWI: An unnamed view identifies those angered as the Jews and those astray as the Christians, citing verses on their anger and earlier deviation. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 BAGHAWI-FULL: A reported identification makes the objects of wrath Jews and the straying ones Christians, supported by Quranic descriptions of each group. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 KASHSHAF: Those who incurred anger are identified as Jews, with 5:60 cited. | mentions 5:60 KASHSHAF-FULL: An unnamed view identifies the angered as Jews, citing the verse that says God cursed them and was angry with them. IBNATIYYA reporting ابن مسعود وابن عباس ومجاهد والسدي وابن زيد وعدي بن حاتم عن النبي: They identify those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; the same interpretation is reported from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim from the Prophet. IBNATIYYA: The author says scripture repeatedly describes God’s wrath against Jews, citing their incurring wrath and the punishment of Sabbath-breakers. | mentions 2:61, 3:112, 5:60, 2:65 IBNATIYYA: In answer to al-Ṭabarī’s question about assigning one label to each group, the author says Jewish transgression, obstinacy, rejection despite signs, and killing prophets characteristically warrant wrath; Christians’ basic unbelief is astray shared by all unbelievers. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن مسعود وابن عباس ومجاهد والسدي وابن زيد: Ibn Masʿud, Ibn ʿAbbas, Mujahid, al-Suddi, and Ibn Zayd identify those angered as Jews and those astray as Christians; ʿAdi ibn Hatim transmits this from the Prophet. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The Qur'an repeatedly associates divine wrath with Jews, including 2:61, 3:112, and 5:60; 2:65 identifies the people turned into apes as Sabbath violators. | mentions 2:61, 3:112, 5:60, 2:65 IBNATIYYA-FULL: The author finds this answer insufficient: Jewish aggression, defiance, disbelief despite signs, and killing prophets especially warrant wrath, while Christians strayed from the start without these specific acts. TABRISI reporting جميع المفسرين: Commentators broadly identify those under anger as Jews, supported by verses about divine anger and the Sabbath violators turned into apes. | mentions 5:60, 2:65 TABRISI reporting الحسن البصري: Hasan says both Jews and Christians are both astray and under anger, though God marks each group by a distinguishing epithet despite their shared traits. TABRISI: This explanation identifies the angered as Jews and the astray as Christians. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting عدي بن حاتم عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, from the Prophet, identifies the objects of anger as Jews and the astray as Christians. RAZI-FULL reporting المشهور: The commonly reported identification makes those under wrath the Jews and those astray the Christians, citing the Qur'an's descriptions of each. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 QURTUBI reporting جمهور المفسرين: Most commentators identify those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; 2:61, 3:112, and 48:6 concern Jewish wrath, and 5:77 Christian error. | mentions 2:61, 3:112, 48:6, 5:77 QURTUBI-FULL reporting الجمهور: Most interpreters identify those under wrath as Jews and those astray as Christians; the Prophet’s explanation to ʿAdi ibn Hatim supports it, as do verses about their wrath and error. | mentions 3:112, 48:6, 5:77 BAYDAWI: One reported identification makes those under wrath the Jews, citin
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
