<<chunk 51, part 3 of 0..5>>
nbelievers, and both terms apply specifically to Jews and Christians. | mentions 16:106, 4:167, 5:60, 5:77"}, {"id": "1:7/q19/p7", "position": "Qur'anic citations can support the Jewish and Christian identifications, but anger and straying also describe unbelievers generally; Alusi says the hadith is the better proof.; cited verses: 5:60, 5:77, 16:106, 4:167", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: Qur'anic citations can support the Jewish and Christian identifications, but anger and straying also describe unbelievers generally; Alusi says the hadith is the better proof. | mentions 5:60, 5:77, 16:106, 4:167"}, {"id": "1:7/q19/p8", "position": "Al-Rāzī suggests that those under anger are unbelievers and the astray are hypocrites, analogizing to al-Baqara’s order of believers, unbelievers, and hypocrites; al-Ālūsī rejects the analogy against the Prophetic report.; cited verses: 2:1, 2:6, 2:8", "reasons": "ALUSI reporting الرازي: Al-Rāzī suggests that those under anger are unbelievers and the astray are hypocrites, analogizing to al-Baqara’s order of believers, unbelievers, and hypocrites; al-Ālūsī rejects the analogy against the Prophetic report. | mentions 2:1, 2:6, 2:8"}]}
{"id": "1:7/q20", "question": "What does the repeated negation before 'the astray' do?", "turns_on": "Whether lā is a true negative, verbal addition, or disambiguating marker.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q20/p1", "position": "Lā is a genuine negation coordinated with ghayr", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Abū Khirāsh’s verse supplies a further example of lā continuing a negative coordination in ولا البكر. MAJAZ: In wa-lā al-ḍāllīn, lā reinforces the preceding negation; Arabic likewise says ‘without good or blessing’ and ‘no benefit nor defense.’ TAB reporting نحويو الكوفة: The Kufans reject the exception analysis: “nor” is a negative conjunction, and Arabic coordinates a negative with a negative, not a negation with an exception. TAB reporting بعض أهل البصرة: Some Basrans call lā before “the astray” an added particle that completes the expression but contributes no negation, citing poetry and “what prevented you from not prostrating?” | mentions 7:12 TAB: Al-Ṭabarī agrees with the Kufans: lā is a true negation coordinated with the negative sense of ghayr, so the request is for the path of the favored, not the wrathful or astray. TAB-FULL reporting نحويو الكوفيين: Kufan grammarians reject exception: coordinating the negative wa-lā al-ḍāllīn with an exception is unattested, since Arabic coordinates exception with exception and negation with negation. TAB-FULL reporting بعض نحويي الكوفة: A Kufan grammarian rejects ghayr meaning other than because lā cannot coordinate with سوى absent a prior negative; he also rejects starting lā with an omitted-negation sense without previous negation. TAB-FULL reporting نحوي من الكوفة: The Kufan answer reads al-ʿAjjāj's lā as genuine negation and explains the other poems' apparent filler lā by the negative earlier in each sentence, as in the line about Abū Bakr and ʿUmar. TAB-FULL: He prefers the Kufan analysis: lā cannot begin as an omitted negative or coordinate with other than or an exception; since ghayr can mean exception, negation, or other than, the only valid reading here is negation, making the verse ask to avoid both groups. ZAJJAJ: Al-ḍāllīn is coordinated with al-maghḍūb ʿalayhim; lā is allowed because ghayr already carries negation, as in ghayr ḍārib meaning “not striking.” NAHHAS: The Kufan objection is not binding because lā here carries a negative sense. THALABI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’ WAHIDI-BASIT reporting الفراء: Al-Farrāʾ rejects accusative ghayr as an exception, arguing that a positive exception cannot be followed by negative lā in coordination. WAHIDI-BASIT: Those allowing exception say an exception resembles negation, so all came except Zayd can mean all came, not Zayd; lā can coordinate by meaning or be an addition. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting صاحب النظم: The author of al-Naẓm says lā in wa-lā al-ḍāllīn prevents misreading al-ḍāllīn as coordinated with those favored; it marks coordination with ghayr, which implies negation. KASHSHAF: La appears because ghayr already carries negation: neither the angered nor the astray. KASHSHAF-FULL: The negative lā before astray is included because ghayr already carries a negative sense. ABUHAYYAN reporting الأخفش والزجاج: Al-Akhfash and al-Zajjāj allow accusative ghayr as a disconnected exception because the preceding wording does not include those who are astray; some readers reject this analysis because of lā. ABUHAYYAN: Lā reinforces the negation already contained in ghayr and is attached to المغضوب عليهم to avoid suggesting that الضالين is coordinated with الذين. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The lā before “those astray” reinforces negation; placing it in the coordination prevents “those astray” from being mistaken as part of “those You favored.” SAMIN-DURR: Ghayr can function like illā for exception, as an adjective by analogy with illā, or like lā for negation, permitting its governed object to precede it. SAMIN-DURR: Ghayr is also read in the accusative as a circumstantial from alladhīna or ʿalayhim, or as a disjoint exception; al-Farrāʾ rejects the latter because lā lacks a preceding negation. SAMIN-DURR: Lā reinforces the negation already carried by ghayr and blocks reading al-ḍāllīn as coordinated with those blessed; Kufans instead equate it with ghayr, and ʿUmar reportedly read that way. IBNKATHIR reporting عمر بن الخطاب: ʿUmar read “and other than the astray”; Ibn Kathir says this report has a sound chain and treats it as explanatory, supporting emphatic negation and separation of the two paths. BIQAI: Ghayr conveys negation rather than an exception: the wording excludes those characterized by the trait from the outset and avoids suggesting a merely lesser class. BIQAI-FULL: Removing the object of bestowed favor broadens the wording; the negation excludes the angry and astray as separate failures, one in action and the other in knowledge. ALUSI reporting الأخفش: A report ascribed to al-Akhfash treats the exception as semantically negative, allowing lā to coordinate by meaning and removing al-Farrāʾ’s objection. ALUSI reporting عمر بن الخطاب: A reading with wa-ghayr in place of wa-lā is reported from ʿUmar and ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr; the muṣḥaf’s mutawātir reading is wa-lā, which reinforces the negation implicit in ghayr. ALUSI-FULL reporting عمر بن الخطاب وعبدالله بن الزبير: A reading attributed to ʿUmar and ʿAbd Allah ibn al-Zubayr adds ghayr before “those astray”; the canonical reading is otherwise, and al-Kufis treat ghayr as negation reinforcing the phrase. ALUSI-FULL reporting الأخفش: Al-Akhfash allows the accusative as a connected or disconnected exception if “favor” is broad; al-Farraʾ forbids joining negative lā to an exceptive phrase meaning “other than.” IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr calls that explanation far-fetched: لا simply reinforces the negation already conveyed by ghayr in a normal negative coordination. | mentions 5:19 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT reporting حاشية الجرجاني على الكشاف: In negation, the added lā after the coordinating conjunction explicitly attaches negation to each item and prevents reading only the combined pair as negated."}, {"id": "1:7/q20/p2", "position": "Lā is added or redundant, reinforcing the expression", "reasons": "FARRA: Farra rejects the claim that ghayr in al-ḥamd means “other than” and lā is extra; extra lā requires a preceding negation. FARRA: The verse “in a well without ḥawr” does not prove an extra lā: here lā is a true negation, while poetry allows an extra lā after an earlier negation. MAJAZ: In ghayr al-maghḍūbi ʿalayhim wa-lā al-ḍāllīn, the first lā is an extra particle completing the phrase, effectively ‘and the straying.’ MAJAZ: Al-ʿAjjāj’s phrase fī biʾr lā ḥawr has an extra lā; the intended sense is a well of ruin or destruction. MAJAZ: Abū al-Najm’s ألا تسخرا means أن يسخرن, showing an extra lā; al-qafandar means ugly and repulsive. MAJAZ: In the cited line, ‘they reproach me in amusement ألا أحبه’ means ‘that I love it,’ with lā treated as extra. NAHHAS reporting البصريون: Basrans treat lā as extra; the Kufans understand it as ghayr. WAHIDI-BASIT: Before an indefinite, lā may be extra; if not extra, it either joins the noun as one genitive compound or contributes negation without affecting the noun's case. IBNATIYYA reporting الطبري: Al-Ṭabarī calls lā extra, citing a rajaz line where ألا تسخرا is understood as أن تسخر. IBNATIYYA: The author rejects al-Ṭabarī’s reading of al-Aḥwaṣ’s line as proof that lā is extra: it means they reproach him for wanting not to love amusement, so lā is operative. TABRISI reporting البصريون: The Basran grammarians take lā as an emphatic extra particle of negation, eliminating an ambiguity that could otherwise allow separate readings of the coordinated words. TABRISI reporting علي بن عيسى الرماني: Al-Rummani explains lā in the exception reading as an extra particle, like in the line about a pit of destruction and the Qur'anic phrase 'that you should not prostrate'. | mentions 7:12 QURTUBI-FULL reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari treats lā in “and not those astray” as redundant, as in the verse “what prevented you from not prostrating.” | mentions 7:12 BAYDAWI: The lā is an extra particle reinforcing the negation already expressed by ghayr, as in the cited grammatical examples. ABUHAYYAN: Some permit accusative ghayr as an exception by treating lā as extra, since they say lā is extra only after prior negation; they cite Qurʾanic and poetic examples, while other grammarians take lā as genuinely negative. ABUHAYYAN: Abū Ḥayyān says the alleged proof that lā is extra in the verse of the generous man is not decisive: lā itself is the object of أبى, and البخل is its apposition or a causal object. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: ʿAlā can also mean ab
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
