<<chunk 51, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:7/q17", "question": "What does divine anger mean here?", "turns_on": "Whether the divine expression names an attribute, will to punish, condemnation, or the punishment itself.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q17/p1", "position": "Divine anger is the will to punish or avenge", "reasons": "THALABI reporting قوم: One group explains God's anger as His will to take vengeance on sinners. MAWARDI reporting unattributed: Another interpretation takes wrath as the will to exact vengeance, since the linguistic root implies harshness, which cannot be ascribed to God. MAWARDI-FULL: A second account interprets God's anger as a will to punish; anger linguistically means severity, a quality unsuitable for God. WAHIDI-QT: Those under wrath are Jews; God's wrath means His willing punishment. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Those under divine anger are the Jews; God's anger means His willing punishment. BAGHAWI-FULL: Those under wrath are people whose path incurred God’s anger; divine anger is the will to punish sinners, but does not befall sinful believers, only disbelievers. KASHSHAF: God's anger is His will to avenge sinners and punish them, acting as a king does when angry with a subordinate. KASHSHAF-FULL: God's anger means His will to take vengeance on sinners, punish them, and treat them as a king does those under his authority. TABRISI: Divine anger is God's will to impose deserved punishment, curse the people, and disavow them; its root denotes severity. QURTUBI: Divine anger can mean God's will to punish, an essential attribute, or the punishment itself, an attribute of action; a hadith says charity extinguishes the Lord's anger. QURTUBI-FULL: Alayhim is grammatically understood as “wrath fell upon them”; wrath linguistically means severity, while in God’s attribute it is either His will to punish or punishment itself. NASAFI: God’s anger means His will to take vengeance on liars and punish them, treating them as a king does those under his authority when angry. NASAFI-FULL: The first “upon them” is an object and the second is a subject; God's anger means His will to exact revenge and impose punishment on deniers. ABUHAYYAN: God's anger may mean His intent to requite a sinner, making it an attribute of essence because His knowledge precedes creation and sin; alternatively it is imposing punishment, an attribute of action. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Divine anger can mean the will to punish, an attribute of essence given God’s prior knowledge, or the act of inflicting punishment, an attribute of action. SAMIN-DURR: Anger is described as the heart's blood surging in intent to take revenge; a prophetic report warns against anger and describes its bodily signs. SAMIN-DURR: Alternative definitions make anger a heart's change toward something disliked, or distinguish divine action-attribute when it means punishment from essential attribute when it means the will to punish. ALUSI reporting السعد: In his commentary on al-Miftāḥ, al-Saʿd defines anger as a movement of the soul whose origin is the will to take revenge. ALUSI reporting السعد: In his commentary on al-Kashshāf, al-Saʿd defines divine anger as the will to take revenge. ALUSI reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī explains God’s anger as His will to punish sinners, bringing punishment upon them as an angry king does to subjects under his authority. ALUSI-FULL: The source gives several technical definitions of anger: a movement arising from desire for vengeance, the will to exact vengeance, or an inward condition producing outward movement; a report likens anger to a glowing ember in the heart. ALUSI-FULL reporting الكشاف: Al-Zamakhshari explains God's anger as His will to exact vengeance and punish sinners, acting as an angry ruler acts toward a subordinate. ELMALILI: When attributed to God, anger means its ultimate end, the will to retaliate or impose punishment, and is compatible with merciful lordship: punishing an oppressor serves mercy to the oppressed."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p2", "position": "Divine anger is punitive action or its effects", "reasons": "TAB: The wrathful are identified with those described in the Qur'an as cursed and punished for disobedience; God also shows the community the way to avoid their fate. | mentions 5:60 TAB reporting بعضهم: One view explains God's anger as His imposing punishment on those He is angry with, in this world or the next. | mentions 43:55, 5:60 TAB reporting ابن عباس: In Ibn ʿAbbās's explanation, the prayer asks God to inspire true monotheistic religion, spare the worshippers His anger like the Jews, and keep them from Christian error and punishment. TAB: Recounting punishments for disobedience warns people away from sin and from incurring God's anger, whose consequences lead to destruction. TAB-FULL: Those under anger are the people God describes as cursed and punished in Qur'an 5:60; He informs believers of their fate and shows them the route to salvation out of mercy. | mentions 5:60 TAB-FULL reporting بعضهم: One theological account says God's anger is the imposition of punishment in this life or the next, citing the drowning of Pharaoh's people and the punishment described in Qur'an 5:60. | mentions 43:55, 5:60 TAB-FULL reporting بعضهم: A third account treats anger as a real divine attribute, intelligible by affirmation but unlike human anger, which involves agitation, pain, or harm; it is an attribute like knowledge and power without creaturely limitations. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses the astray as Christians whom God led astray through their fabrication about Him; the prayer asks for the true monotheistic faith, protection from Jewish wrath and Christian error, and mercy to prevent their punishment. THALABI reporting قيل: Another explanation calls anger a kind of punishment opposite to divine pleasure. MAWARDI reporting unattributed: A fourth interprets wrath as a kind of punishment named anger, just as God’s blessings are named mercy. MAWARDI-FULL: A fourth account calls a kind of punishment anger, just as God's bounty is called mercy. BAGHAWI: “Not those angered” means a path other than that of those God wills to punish for disobedience. IBNATIYYA: The author says scripture repeatedly describes God’s wrath against Jews, citing their incurring wrath and the punishment of Sabbath-breakers. | mentions 2:61, 3:112, 5:60, 2:65 IBNATIYYA: Here divine wrath means God’s manifesting ordeals, punishments, humiliation, and similar signs that He has emphatically distanced them from His mercy. IBNATIYYA-FULL: God's anger means that he exposes them to trials, punishments, and humiliation, showing their decisive removal from his mercy. RAZI-FULL: Razi poses the problem that divine anger follows knowledge of human sin: if God's knowledge is eternal, why create people destined for endless punishment and why create what He is angry with? RAZI-FULL: Human anger is a bodily change, impossible for God; psychological terms applied to God signify their final effect, so divine anger means willing harm, while divine modesty means leaving an act. QURTUBI: Arabic anger connotes severity: a harsh person is ghadub, a fierce serpent al-ghadub, and a folded camel-hide shield ghadba for its toughness. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A hadith says charity extinguishes the Lord’s wrath, treating wrath as an attribute of action when it means the punishment. BAYDAWI-FULL: Divine anger denotes its ultimate effect, punishment; عليهم is a passive-subject phrase, unlike the earlier construction, and لا reinforces the negation in غير. ABUHAYYAN: The passive wording for those angered is tactful in a humble plea: the worshipper attributes favor to the One asked for guidance but avoids confronting Him with the description of vengeance. SAMIN-DURR: When attributed to God, anger means retribution; غضبت لفلان is said of a living person and غضبت به of a dead one. BURSEVI: Divine anger cannot mean its human beginning, so it denotes its end or effect, such as punishment, retribution, or painful seizure. BURSEVI: Divine anger perfects the function of the left hand: mercy and severity have distinct effects, and severity completes what cannot be repaired by mercy. | mentions 39:67 ELMALILI: A temporary punishment or pain that prepares future blessings does not make someone one of those under wrath; outcomes determine the judgment, as 2:155 illustrates. | mentions 2:155 IBNASHUR: Because literal anger entails change, which cannot apply to God, the attribution means its consequence—punishment, humiliation, or worldly exclusion—or a representational metaphor. IBNASHUR: Divine anger is God’s treatment of those who oppose guidance, ranging up to the lasting punishment of polytheists and hypocrites; dislike is lesser, and both differ from creative will. | mentions 39:7, 6:112, 10:99 IBNASHUR reporting بعض ملوك الفرس: An unnamed Persian king said his reign endured because he punished according to the offense rather than according to anger. IBNASHUR-FULL: Divine anger means God's treatment of those who leave guidance and disobey, culminating in punishment; anger, dislike, pleasure, and love differ from creative will. | mentions 39:7, 6:112, 10:99 IBNASHUR-FULL: God cannot literally undergo anger or change; the attribution must mean its effects, such as punishment, humiliation, curse, or exclusion, or function as a representational metaphor."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p3", "position": "Divine anger is condemnation or blame", "reasons": "TAB reporting بعضهم: Another view takes divine anger as God's blame of people and their deeds, and verbal condemnation of them. TAB: Jews and Christians are both astray and under wrath; God labels each group by a real, recognizable trait, without implying that it lacks the other's blameworthy traits. TAB-FULL reporting بعضهم: A second account understands divine anger as blame for their conduct and verbal reproach or insult. TAB-FULL: Both Jews and Christians are astray and under wrath, but God labels each by a true, recognizable characteristic, 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
