<<chunk 51, part 1 of 0..5>>
without listing every blameworthy trait of either group. THALABI reporting قيل: A third explanation defines anger as condemnation of sinners for the ugliness of their acts. MAWARDI reporting unattributed: A third interpretation is that God’s wrath means His condemnation of them. MAWARDI-FULL: A third account interprets God's anger as His condemnation of them. IBNKATHIR: Qurʾanic references to Jewish anger and wrongdoing support the identification: Israel's children incur anger for rejecting revelation and are condemned for sin and failure to stop wrongdoing. | mentions 2:90, 5:60, 5:78, 5:79 BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Harali defines the condemned as those who intentionally oppose guidance and thereby incur divine wrath, or those who turn toward guidance then stray without intending to. | mentions 93:6 ITQAN: The verse explicitly attributes favor to God, but avoids saying “those with whom You were angry,” shifting expression so anger is not verbally attributed to God in direct address. IBNASHUR-FULL: Angered people represent deliberate religious disregard or far-fetched interpretation, while astray people err through poor understanding or inattention; both are blameworthy. IBNASHUR-FULL: Anger for oneself is blameworthy, but anger defending public and religious interests is praiseworthy; the Prophet did not get angry for himself but did for God's limits. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The Fātiḥa explicitly attributes favor to God (‘You bestowed favor’) while describing the blameworthy as those under anger and those astray. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The passive المغضوب عليهم leaves the agent open so the condemned face anger from God, angels, people, and even their own skins. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: Repeating لا ensures exclusion of either condemned group on its own; without it the wording might exclude only those who combine anger and error, as the two-part prohibition analogy shows. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The angered oppose the favored just as anger opposes grace; the chapter's ending gathers its opening praise, judgment, exclusive worship, reliance, and guidance into the fates of the condemned."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p4", "position": "Anger is a real divine attribute unlike human agitation", "reasons": "TAB reporting بعضهم: A third view affirms an intelligible divine attribute called anger, while distinguishing it from human agitation and affirming that God's essence is free of affliction. TAB-FULL reporting السدي عن أبي مالك وأبي صالح عن ابن عباس ومرة الهمداني عن ابن مسعود وناس من أصحاب النبي: The report attributed through al-Suddī to these early authorities identifies those under wrath as Jews. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting عدي بن حاتم: A report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, attributed to the Prophet, identifies those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; no grading is stated. WAHIDI-BASIT: For the standard reading, the sense is the path of those favored who are neither under wrath nor astray; denying these traits implicitly attributes them to others, supporting implication in discourse. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: Razi's Ash'arite school reads the sequence as God's anger causing their misguidance; the reverse would make a human attribute affect God, which is impossible. BAYDAWI: When anger is attributed to God, it denotes the final outcome or endpoint, not an emotion in God. IBNKATHIR: The verse attributes favor directly to God, leaves the agent of anger unexpressed although God is its true agent, and assigns misguidance to those who embody it although He misleads by His decree; cited verses affirm His exclusive control of guidance and misguidance. | mentions 58:14, 18:17, 7:186 BURHAN reporting قيل: One explanation says praise uses third person because it ranks below worship, while direct address elevates the worshipper's encounter; similarly, blessing is explicitly attributed to God but anger is phrased obliquely as a matter of etiquette. | mentions 6:101 BURSEVI: A common reading identifies those angered as Jews and those astray as Christians, but neither group's label is exclusive because Scripture attributes both traits to both. ALUSI: Following the early generations, al-Ālūsī affirms anger as an eternal divine attribute fitting God’s majesty without specifying how or claiming to know its reality, like mercy. ALUSI: The blessing is directly attributed to God as a deferential appeal for guidance to those whose favor is established; anger is put in the passive and left unassigned out of courtesy in a humble request for kindness. ALUSI-FULL: Alusi follows the early community: anger is a divine attribute befitting God, whose reality and manner are unknown, like mercy; “My mercy precedes My anger” concerns the greater or earlier manifestation of mercy. ELMALILI: Qur'an also attributes divine wrath to disbelievers generally and describes those who reject God's way as far astray, supporting the comprehensive reading. | mentions 16:106"}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p5", "position": "Human anger is bodily or psychological agitation; the divine usage is interpreted accordingly", "reasons": "ALUSI: A definition in Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid describes anger as a state of the soul followed by the spirit’s outward motion seeking revenge; another account calls it a change when the heart’s blood boils. ALUSI: A hadith warns people to beware of anger, likening it to a glowing ember in the heart and pointing to swollen neck veins and reddened eyes; no grading or source is given here. IBNASHUR: Human anger is a psychic response to what displeases, producing aversion and harsh treatment; revenge may follow but is not essential, contrary to those who make it definitional. IBNASHUR-FULL: Human anger is a psychological aversion that can lead to harsh treatment and sometimes revenge; revenge is not essential to anger, whose intensity varies among people and customs. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT reporting التفسير القيم: Corrupt knowledge produces misguidance and corrupt intention produces anger; these are the two root diseases of the heart. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT: The knowing disobedience of Iblis was the first sin; after it, he vowed to mislead humanity, so anger appropriately precedes misguidance. | mentions 4:119"}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p6", "position": "In ghayr al-maghḍūbi ʿalayhim wa-lā al-ḍāllīn, the first lā is an extra particle completing the phrase, effectively ‘and the straying.’", "reasons": "MAJAZ: In ghayr al-maghḍūbi ʿalayhim wa-lā al-ḍāllīn, the first lā is an extra particle completing the phrase, effectively ‘and the straying.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p7", "position": "Anger means being left to oneself, while error means losing God's protection and attachment.", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Anger means being left to oneself, while error means losing God's protection and attachment."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p8", "position": "Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’", "reasons": "THALABI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p9", "position": "Ghayr may instead be accusative as a circumstantial expression or an exception meaning except those under wrath; as a circumstantial phrase it means not those under wrath.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Ghayr may instead be accusative as a circumstantial expression or an exception meaning except those under wrath; as a circumstantial phrase it means not those under wrath."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p10", "position": "The prayer's prohibition of indecency, wrongdoing, and aggression addresses the effects of desire, anger, and caprice respectively.; cited verses: 29:45", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The prayer's prohibition of indecency, wrongdoing, and aggression addresses the effects of desire, anger, and caprice respectively. | mentions 29:45"}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p11", "position": "“Al-maghdūb ʿalayhim” means those incurred anger; anger can also mean turning away because that is one of its consequences.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: “Al-maghdūb ʿalayhim” means those incurred anger; anger can also mean turning away because that is one of its consequences."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p12", "position": "Al-maghḍūb is genitive by annexation and a passive participle; the prepositional phrase supplies its agent, and the relative al means those who were angered.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: Al-maghḍūb is genitive by annexation and a passive participle; the prepositional phrase supplies its agent, and the relative al means those who were angered."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p13", "position": "Al-Fatiha's final prayer details the highest request: faith protected from sin and its resulting wrath and error; “those You favored” means believers, and the favor is unrestricted because faith entails every blessing.", "reasons": "ITQAN: Al-Fatiha's final prayer details the highest request: faith protected from sin and its resulting wrath and error; “those You favored” means believers, and the favor is unrestricted because faith entails every blessing."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p14", "position": "The hadith God’s mercy preceded His anger means either that mercy’s effects are greater or that mercy appeared earlier.", "reasons": "ALUSI: The hadith God’s mercy preceded His anger means either that mercy’s effects are greater or that mercy appeared earlier."}, {"id": "1:7/q17/p15", "position": "Anger is the soul's agitation toward retaliation at something disliked, opposed to satisfaction; Turkish equivalents include anger, indignation, and wrath.", "reasons": "ELMALILI: Anger is the soul's agitation toward retaliation at something disliked, opposed to satisfaction; Turkish equivalents include anger, indignation, and wrath."}]}
{"id": "1:7/q18", "question": "Why is anger expressed passively?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q18/p1", "position":
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
