<<chunk 53, part 2 of 0..5>>
reasons": "SULAMI reporting ابن عطاء: Those under anger are abandoned, expelled, and humiliated; the astray have left God's guidance, knowledge, and guardianship. RAZI-FULL: A broader reading takes those under wrath as people who err in outward deeds, including sinners, and those astray as people who err in belief; the wording is general and should not be restricted without cause. RAZI-FULL: The verse divides people into the obedient who are favored, sinners under wrath, and those ignorant of religion or unbelievers who are astray. RAZI-FULL: Those with complete favor unite knowledge of truth for its own sake with doing good for its own sake; lacking practice makes sinners under wrath, while lacking knowledge makes people astray. | mentions 4:93, 10:32 RAZI-FULL: The verse establishes the immunity of prophets and angels from actions or beliefs contrary to the favored path: otherwise they would stray and could not be models or belong among those favored. | mentions 10:32 RAZI-FULL: The favored are complete in knowledge and practice, the condemned neglect righteous deeds, and the astray lack sound belief; asking for the favored path seeks the example of the sound group. BAYDAWI: Bayḍāwī also finds apt a general reading: sinners fail in action and incur wrath, while those ignorant of God fail in understanding and go astray. BAYDAWI-FULL: A further interpretation calls deliberate sinners angered and those ignorant of God astray: failure of action is impiety, while failure of understanding is error. | mentions 4:93 ABUHAYYAN: Ḍalāl can mean ruin, concealment, loss, ignorance of an object's location, waste, neglect, forgetting, departure from the proper route, bewilderment, or hesitation; Qurʾanic usage also includes lack of detailed knowledge and love. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The root of ḍalāl carries senses including perishing, disappearing, being lost or ignorant, straying, bewilderment, and wavering; Qurʾanic uses can mean lack of detailed knowledge or love. IBNKATHIR: Those subject to anger know the truth but turn away; the astray lack knowledge and wander without reaching the truth. BURSEVI: Misguidance means deliberately or accidentally leaving the sound path; sinners fail in action, while the ignorant fail in knowledge. | mentions 4:93, 10:32 IBNASHUR reporting قالوا: In religious usage, misguidance opposes full faith and ranges from neglecting recommended practice to unbelief; the author defines it as absence of guidance and notes sealing as its extreme form. IBNASHUR-FULL: It also rejects the fate of people who received guidance but failed to preserve their course and became astray through poor understanding of the blessing of knowledge. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT: People are either blessed, or wretched in two ways: knowing truth but violating it, or lacking knowledge of truth and being astray. | mentions 18:103-104 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT reporting البيضاوي: One proposed reading identifies the angry as sinners and the astray as those ignorant of God. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT reporting التفسير القيم: People divide by knowledge and practice: the knowledgeable doer is blessed, the knowledgeable follower of desire is angry upon, and the ignorant is astray; the first is more deserving of anger. STUDYQURAN: The verse prays to follow those whom God elevates in belief, knowledge, and uncorrupted faith, and to avoid disbelievers, some astray and some under wrath. | mentions 6:83, 58:11, 6:82 STUDYQURAN: Another interpretation associates disbelief with wrath and lesser sins with straying. STUDYQURAN: The Quran frequently describes disbelievers, those who exchange belief for disbelief, and caprice-followers without guidance as astray. | mentions 3:90, 2:108, 4:136, 4:167, 28:50"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p3", "position": "Those who leave the Sunnah", "reasons": "THALABI reporting التستري: Al-Tustarī identifies innovation with those angered and departure from Sunna with those astray. BAGHAWI reporting سهل بن عبد الله: Sahl ibn ʿAbd Allah says those astray are people who have left the Sunna. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting سهل بن عبد الله: Sahl b. Abd Allah interprets those under wrath as innovators and the straying ones as people departing from the Sunnah. QURTUBI-FULL: Another view calls innovators recipients of wrath and those who leave the sunnas astray; the author says this is good, though the Prophet’s interpretation is best. IBNASHUR-FULL: Misguidance is mistakenly taking a path other than the intended one, whether consciously or unknowingly; its religious use is metaphorical and ranges from neglecting sunnahs to disbelief."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p4", "position": "Polytheists", "reasons": "QURTUBI reporting قيل: An alternative says those under wrath are polytheists and the astray are hypocrites. QURTUBI-FULL reporting بعضهم: Other interpreters identify those under wrath as polytheists and those astray as hypocrites. ABUHAYYAN: Another reported identification makes those angered the Jews and those astray the polytheists; Abū Ḥayyān notes other views without specifying them here."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p5", "position": "Hypocrites", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Razi also offers a possible reading in which those under wrath are unbelievers and those astray are hypocrites, following the order of groups in the opening of al-Baqara. | mentions 2:6, 2:8 ALUSI reporting الرازي: Al-Rāzī suggests that those under anger are unbelievers and the astray are hypocrites, analogizing to al-Baqara’s order of believers, unbelievers, and hypocrites; al-Ālūsī rejects the analogy against the Prophetic report. | mentions 2:1, 2:6, 2:8 ALUSI-FULL reporting الرازي: Al-Razi proposes that the angry are unbelievers and the astray are hypocrites, paralleling the opening of al-Baqara; Alusi rejects the analogy against the Prophet's explicit report. | mentions 2:1 STUDYQURAN: Some commentators identify those incurring wrath with idolaters and those astray with hypocrites."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p6", "position": "The two genitive parses are close in meaning: those favored with true guidance are not under God's wrath or astray; the adjectival parse states this directly.", "reasons": "TAB: The two genitive parses are close in meaning: those favored with true guidance are not under God's wrath or astray; the adjectival parse states this directly."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p7", "position": "The two genitive parses have nearly the same implication: those truly favored with guidance to the true religion are not under God's anger and are not astray.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The two genitive parses have nearly the same implication: those truly favored with guidance to the true religion are not under God's anger and are not astray."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p8", "position": "Even if ghayr repeats ṣirāṭ rather than qualifying those favored, their evident description as guided by God already implies they are neither objects of His anger nor astray.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Even if ghayr repeats ṣirāṭ rather than qualifying those favored, their evident description as guided by God already implies they are neither objects of His anger nor astray."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p9", "position": "Some Basrans say lā before those astray is an expendable filler, appealing to poetry and to Qur'an 7:12, which they read as meaning What kept you from prostrating.; cited verses: 7:12", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting بعض أهل البصرة: Some Basrans say lā before those astray is an expendable filler, appealing to poetry and to Qur'an 7:12, which they read as meaning What kept you from prostrating. | mentions 7:12"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p10", "position": "The same Basran analysis takes ghayr as meaning other than, so the favored are those other than the objects of wrath and the astray.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting بعض أهل البصرة: The same Basran analysis takes ghayr as meaning other than, so the favored are those other than the objects of wrath and the astray."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p11", "position": "The astray are exemplified by Qur'an 5:77's People of the Book who exceed the truth, follow the desires of already astray people, and stray from the path.; cited verses: 5:77", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The astray are exemplified by Qur'an 5:77's People of the Book who exceed the truth, follow the desires of already astray people, and stray from the path. | mentions 5:77"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p12", "position": "Wail ibn Hujr reports that while praying with the Prophet, he heard him say amin after reciting ‘nor those astray.’", "reasons": "IBNHIBBAN reporting وائل بن حجر: Wail ibn Hujr reports that while praying with the Prophet, he heard him say amin after reciting ‘nor those astray.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p13", "position": "Those under anger are consumed in Satan's wastelands; the astray are expelled from obedience to the Merciful.", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Those under anger are consumed in Satan's wastelands; the astray are expelled from obedience to the Merciful."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p14", "position": "Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’", "reasons": "THALABI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj says lā may coordinate with ghayr because ghayr already carries negation, effectively meaning neither those angered nor those astray; this is not possible when ghayr means ‘other than.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p15", "position": "ʿUmar and ʿAlī read ‘and not those astray.’", "reasons": "THALABI reporting عمر بن الخطاب: ʿUmar and ʿAlī read ‘and not those astray.’"}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p16", "position": "Al-Wāqidī glosses those angered as people who oppose and disobey, and those astray as people who leave religion and faith.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting الواقدي: Al-Wāqidī glosses those angered as people who oppose and disobey, and those astray as people who leave religion and faith."}, {"id": "1:7/q22/p17", "position": "Those who go astray fail to witness God's prior choice and the unfolding of His decrees.", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI: Thos
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
