<<chunk 53, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:7/q22", "question": "Who are the astray?", "turns_on": "Whether the Prophetic identifications specify the only referents or exemplify wider classes of disobedience and error.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q22/p1", "position": "The Christians, as an identified example or restricted referent", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The straying people are the polytheists, identified here as the Christians. ABDURRAZZAQ reporting النبي: The Prophet identifies Christians as the astray when asked who they are at Wādī al-Qurā. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Those who are astray are the Christians. TAB reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: In reports from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, the Prophet identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: In the Wādī al-Qurā report, the Prophet answers that the people asked about are the astray, meaning the Christians. TAB reporting مجاهد: Mujāhid identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, through al-Ḍaḥḥāk, glosses the phrase as the Christians' way, whom God led astray through their false claim about Him. TAB reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās, in a report through Ibn Jurayj, identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting ابن عباس، ابن مسعود، وناس من أصحاب النبي: The report transmitted by al-Suddī from early authorities identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting الربيع: Al-Rabīʿ identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد: ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB reporting زيد: Zayd, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd's father, identifies the astray as the Christians. TAB: In Arabic, anyone who departs from the intended route and follows an unsound way is astray; Christians receive this label for missing the truth and taking a wrong religious path. TAB: Jews and Christians are both astray and under wrath; God labels each group by a real, recognizable trait, without implying that it lacks the other's blameworthy traits. TAB reporting بعض أهل الغباء من القدرية: Some ignorant Qadarites infer from calling Christians astray, without calling them those who mislead, that God has no causal role in their acts of misguidance. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن عدي بن حاتم: The Prophet identifies those astray as Christians when asked about the verse. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن عدي بن حاتم: The Prophet tells ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim that those astray are Christians; further routes repeat this identification. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن عبد الله بن شقيق: Reports from a questioner during the siege at Wādī al-Qurā have the Prophet identify the people asked about as Christians, the astray. TAB-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujāhid identifies those astray as Christians. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses the astray as Christians whom God led astray through their fabrication about Him; the prayer asks for the true monotheistic faith, protection from Jewish wrath and Christian error, and mercy to prevent their punishment. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس والسدي عن ابن عباس وابن مسعود وناس من أصحاب النبي وربيع وعبد الرحمن بن زيد وأبوه: The cited authorities—through Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Suddī's report, Rabīʿ, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd and his father—identify those astray as Christians. TAB-FULL: In Arabic, anyone deviating from the intended road is astray; Christians are so called because they miss the truth and take a religious route other than the straight one. TAB-FULL: Both Jews and Christians are astray and under wrath, but God labels each by a true, recognizable characteristic, without listing every blameworthy trait of either group. TAB-FULL reporting بعض أهل الغباء من القدرية: Some Qadariyyah wrongly infer from calling Christians astray and Jews objects of wrath that human acts belong only to people and that God does not cause their misguidance; al-Ṭabarī says this betrays ignorance of Arabic attribution and the many verses naming God as guide and misguider. | mentions 10:22, 45:23 IBNABIHATIM reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet identifies those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; the author says exegetes do not disagree on this wording. IBNABIHATIM: The author says he knows no disagreement among exegetes over the identification of those astray as Christians and those under wrath as Jews. IBNABIHATIM reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: A second report from the Prophet likewise says the Jews incurred wrath and the Christians went astray. THALABI reporting رسول الله: In a report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, the Prophet identifies those angered with the Jews and those astray with the Christians. THALABI reporting رسول الله: At Wādī al-Qurā, the Prophet points to Jews fighting him as those angered and to Christians as the other party, those astray. THALABI: The author links divine anger against Jews to 5:60 and the description of Christians as astray to 5:77. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 MAWARDI reporting عدي بن حاتم: Adi ibn Hatim reports that the Prophet identified those under wrath as Jews and those astray as Christians; al-Mawardi says all exegetes agree. MAWARDI: Al-Mawardi says all exegetes agree that those under wrath are Jews and those astray are Christians. MAWARDI-FULL reporting عدي بن حاتم: He asked the Prophet who the angered and astray groups were; the Prophet identified them as Jews and Christians, respectively, as all exegetes agree. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting عدي بن حاتم: A report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, attributed to the Prophet, identifies those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; no grading is stated. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting النبي: A second report says the Prophet at Wādī al-Qurā was asked by a man from Bali about two groups; he pointed to Jews as those under wrath and Christians as astray; no grading is stated. WAHIDI-QT: Those astray are Christians, and Muslims ask to avoid both their error and the Jews' incurred wrath. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The people who went astray are the Christians; Muslims ask to avoid their deviation from truth as well as the Jews' incurred anger. BAGHAWI: An unnamed view identifies those angered as the Jews and those astray as the Christians, citing verses on their anger and earlier deviation. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 BAGHAWI-FULL: A reported identification makes the objects of wrath Jews and the straying ones Christians, supported by Quranic descriptions of each group. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 KASHSHAF: Those astray are identified as Christians, with 5:77 cited. | mentions 5:77 IBNATIYYA reporting ابن مسعود وابن عباس ومجاهد والسدي وابن زيد وعدي بن حاتم عن النبي: They identify those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; the same interpretation is reported from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim from the Prophet. IBNATIYYA: The committed Christians had followed a true religious law before Muḥammad’s law arrived; once it came, they went astray. IBNATIYYA: Other Christians were already astray because their accounts of Jesus diverged from the beginning. IBNATIYYA: He links the Christians’ error to the verse describing a people who strayed earlier, misled many, and left the right way. | mentions 5:77 IBNATIYYA: In answer to al-Ṭabarī’s question about assigning one label to each group, the author says Jewish transgression, obstinacy, rejection despite signs, and killing prophets characteristically warrant wrath; Christians’ basic unbelief is astray shared by all unbelievers. IBNATIYYA: Calling Christians astray does not support the Qadari argument that they created their own misguidance: as with a wall collapsing or a tree moving, God created their misguidance while they acquired the act of straying. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن مسعود وابن عباس ومجاهد والسدي وابن زيد: Ibn Masʿud, Ibn ʿAbbas, Mujahid, al-Suddi, and Ibn Zayd identify those angered as Jews and those astray as Christians; ʿAdi ibn Hatim transmits this from the Prophet. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Christians who followed their prior law went astray once Muhammad's law arrived; others had already gone astray through their divided claims about Jesus. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The Qur'an says Christians followed desires of people who had previously strayed and misled many in 5:77. | mentions 5:77 IBNATIYYA-FULL: The author finds this answer insufficient: Jewish aggression, defiance, disbelief despite signs, and killing prophets especially warrant wrath, while Christians strayed from the start without these specific acts. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Calling Christians “astray” does not support Qadarite claims that they made themselves astray: the intransitive phrasing works like “the wall collapsed” or “the tree moved”; God created their error and they acquired it. TABRISI: The astray are identified as Christians, supported by the warning against those who went astray and led many astray. | mentions 5:77 TABRISI reporting الحسن البصري: Hasan says both Jews and Christians are both astray and under anger, though God marks each group by a distinguishing epithet despite their shared traits. TABRISI: This explanation identifies the angered as Jews and the astray as Christians. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting عدي بن حاتم عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report from ʿAdī ibn Ḥātim, from the Prophet, identifies the objects of anger as Jews and the astray as Christians. RAZI-FULL reporting المشهور: The commonly reported identification makes those under wrath the Jews and those astray the Christians, citing the Qur'an's descriptions of each. | mentions 5:60, 5:77 QURTUBI reporting جمهور المفسرين: Most commentators identify those under wrath as Jews and the astray as Christians; 2:61, 3:112, and 48:6 concern Jewish wrath, and 5:77 Christian error. | mentions 2:61, 3:112, 48:6, 5:77 QURTUBI-FULL reporting الجمهور: Most interpreters identify those under wrath as Jews and those astray as Christians; the Prophet’s explanation to ʿAdi ibn Hatim supports it, as do verses about their wrath and error. | mentions 3:112, 48:6, 5:77 BAYDAWI: One reported identification makes those astray the Christians, citing 5:77. | mentions 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
