<<chunk 56, part 3 of 0..3>>
ces.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF: Amin is not Quran because it was not entered in the codices."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p2", "position": "The Prophet said Gabriel taught him Amin upon finishing al-Fatiha and called it like a seal on a book; it is not Quran because absent from the codices.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said Gabriel taught him Amin upon finishing al-Fatiha and called it like a seal on a book; it is not Quran because absent from the codices."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p3", "position": "Āmīn is an imperative-like expression meaning “answer” or “grant the prayer”; it is not part of the Qur'an, by consensus.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI: Āmīn is an imperative-like expression meaning “answer” or “grant the prayer”; it is not part of the Qur'an, by consensus."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p4", "position": "Āmīn is not Qur'an, but ending the sura with it is recommended because Gabriel taught it to the Prophet as a seal on the book; ʿAlī similarly calls it the seal of the Lord of the worlds.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: Āmīn is not Qur'an, but ending the sura with it is recommended because Gabriel taught it to the Prophet as a seal on the book; ʿAlī similarly calls it the seal of the Lord of the worlds."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p5", "position": "The Prophet said Gabriel taught him amin after he finished reciting the Fatiha and compared it to a seal on a letter; amin is not Qur’an because it does not appear in the codices.", "reasons": "NASAFI reporting النبي عليه السلام: The Prophet said Gabriel taught him amin after he finished reciting the Fatiha and compared it to a seal on a letter; amin is not Qur’an because it does not appear in the codices."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p6", "position": "The poet's evidence shows both long and short forms of Amin, and a Prophetic report says Gabriel taught Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, like a seal on a letter; it is not Qur'an because codices omit…", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL: The poet's evidence shows both long and short forms of Amin, and a Prophetic report says Gabriel taught Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, like a seal on a letter; it is not Qur'an because codices omit it."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p7", "position": "The word Āmīn is not Qurʾān; Abū Ḥayyān omits discussion of its forms, meaning, and prayer ruling, along with introductory istiʿādha, as material outside his intended tafsīr scope.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN: The word Āmīn is not Qurʾān; Abū Ḥayyān omits discussion of its forms, meaning, and prayer ruling, along with introductory istiʿādha, as material outside his intended tafsīr scope."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p8", "position": "Amin is not part of the Quran by consensus; it means respond and is an indeclinable imperative noun.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: Amin is not part of the Quran by consensus; it means respond and is an indeclinable imperative noun."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p9", "position": "Āmīn is not part of the Qurʾān by consensus; a slight pause separates it from the sūra. Al-Ālūsī rejects Mujāhid’s contrary attribution as utterly false because it appears in no muṣḥaf.", "reasons": "ALUSI: Āmīn is not part of the Qurʾān by consensus; a slight pause separates it from the sūra. Al-Ālūsī rejects Mujāhid’s contrary attribution as utterly false because it appears in no muṣḥaf."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p10", "position": "Al-Wāḥidī calls a doubled mīm a dialect form; another view calls it an error. Since Āmīn is a non-Qurʾānic supplication with a sound meaning, some say that pronunciation does not invalidate prayer.", "reasons": "ALUSI reporting الواحدي: Al-Wāḥidī calls a doubled mīm a dialect form; another view calls it an error. Since Āmīn is a non-Qurʾānic supplication with a sound meaning, some say that pronunciation does not invalidate prayer."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p11", "position": "Amin is not part of the Qur'an by consensus, so a brief pause separates it from the next sura; the view attributed to Mujahid that it belongs to al-Fatiha is false.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: Amin is not part of the Qur'an by consensus, so a brief pause separates it from the next sura; the view attributed to Mujahid that it belongs to al-Fatiha is false."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p12", "position": "Amin is an imperative-like noun of action meaning 'answer' or 'accept'; it is not part of Qur'anic wording and therefore is not written in the codex.", "reasons": "ELMALILI: Amin is an imperative-like noun of action meaning 'answer' or 'accept'; it is not part of Qur'anic wording and therefore is not written in the codex."}, {"id": "1:7/q28/p13", "position": "Amin means asking that the prayer be accepted; it is not part of Fatiha or a verse, and hadiths say the Prophet said it after Fatiha and instructed others to do so.", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Amin means asking that the prayer be accepted; it is not part of Fatiha or a verse, and hadiths say the Prophet said it after Fatiha and instructed others to do so."}]}
{"id": "1:7/q29", "question": "How is Āmīn pronounced?", "turns_on": "The cited reports, transmitted wording, and differing grammatical or legal inferences.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q29/p1", "position": "Short Āmīn", "reasons": "BAGHAWI: The reader should say Amin after finishing al-Fatiha, separated from it by a brief pause; it may be pronounced short or long. BAGHAWI-FULL: The reciter should say Amin after a separate pause; the word is normally light, though grammarians allow a long or short vowel, and means ‘God, hear and answer.’ KASHSHAF: Amin has long and short alif, both attested by poetry. KASHSHAF-FULL: Amin is an indeclinable sound used for the verb respond; it has long and short forms, and a poetic line illustrates it. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting جبير بن الأضبط: Some Arabs shorten amin, as illustrated by Jubayr ibn al-Adbat's verse. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The nūn is open in both pronunciations; āmīn has a short-vowel form amīn and a long-vowel form āmīn. BAYDAWI: The alif in āmīn may be lengthened or shortened; two poetic lines attest the forms, though their poets are unnamed. NASAFI: Amin is a spoken formula meaning ‘answer/respond,’ treated as a noun for the imperative just as ruwayd means ‘wait.’ It has long and short forms; the short vowel length is original, while the long form lengthens the hamza. NASAFI-FULL: The poet's evidence shows both long and short forms of Amin, and a Prophetic report says Gabriel taught Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, like a seal on a letter; it is not Qur'an because codices omit it. NASAFI-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Asked about Amin, Ibn Abbas reports that the Prophet explained it as “respond” or “so be it”; the word is a built verbal noun with long and short vowel forms. SAMIN-DURR: Amin has long and short forms, each attested in poetry. IBNKATHIR: It is recommended to say amin after al-Fatiha, pronounced either with a long or short first vowel; it means “O God, answer.” A report from Waʾil says the Prophet lengthened it, and al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan. ALUSI reporting قيل: A strange view derives the Arabicized word from the foreign hamīn because fāʿīl is not an Arabic pattern; a response says it may be a unique pattern with analogues, or originally short and lengthened. ALUSI: Readers disagree whether the alif in Āmīn is inherently long or short; groups support each origin."}, {"id": "1:7/q29/p2", "position": "Long Āmīn", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting أبو موسى الأشعري عن النبي: The Prophet says to follow the imam: say Amin at al-Fatiha's end so God answers, follow his bowing and prostration, and say ‘Our Lord, praise belongs to You’ after he says God hears praise; his movements are offset so followers do not precede him. MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting النبي عن أبي هريرة: The Prophet teaches followers not to anticipate the imam, to say Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, and to answer ‘Our Lord, praise belongs to You’ after the imam says God hears praise; agreement with the angels brings forgiveness for those in the mosque. IBNATIYYA: Some Arabs lengthen Āmīn; a poetic line repeats the long form and imagines needing two thousand Āmīns. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الشاعر: Some Arabs lengthen amin; the cited verse uses the long form and repeats it. NASAFI: A cited poem witnesses the long form amina; another line uses amin and asks God to increase the distance between the lovers. ABUHAYYAN: The word Āmīn is not Qurʾān; Abū Ḥayyān omits discussion of its forms, meaning, and prayer ruling, along with introductory istiʿādha, as material outside his intended tafsīr scope. DURR reporting وائل بن حجر: Wāʾil b. Ḥujr heard the Prophet say Āmīn after al-Fātiḥa’s ending, prolonging his voice. DURR-FULL reporting وائل بن حجر: Wail ibn Hujr heard the Prophet say amin after the final words of al-Fatiha, prolonging his voice. ITQAN reporting وائل بن حجر: Wail ibn Hujr reports that the Prophet recited “Amen” after “those astray,” prolonging his voice. ALUSI-FULL: Amin is not part of the Qur'an by consensus, so a brief pause separates it from the next sura; the view attributed to Mujahid that it belongs to al-Fatiha is false."}, {"id": "1:7/q29/p3", "position": "Āmīn with doubled mīm", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan and Jaʿfar al-Sadiq are reported to pronounce amin with a doubled mīm, like the Qurʾanic word in 5:2. | mentions 5:2 ALUSI reporting الواحدي: Al-Wāḥidī calls a doubled mīm a dialect form; another view calls it an error. Since Āmīn is a non-Qurʾānic supplication with a sound meaning, some say that pronunciation does not invalidate prayer. ALUSI-FULL: Amin is an Arabic indeclinable imperative-noun meaning “respond”; other views call it broader in meaning, foreign, a divine name, or a form with a doubled mīm, which the source discusses and disputes."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
