<<chunk 56, part 2 of 0..3>>
 short forms, and a poetic line illustrates it. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the Prophet explained Amin as meaning do it or answer. IBNATIYYA reporting النبي: A report says the Prophet heard a man supplicate and said his request was assured if he concluded; when asked how, he answered: with Āmīn. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الحسن بن أبي الحسن وثعلب: Most scholars, including al-Hasan and Thaʿlab, interpret amin as “O God, respond” or “Respond, Lord.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting الحسن والزجاج: A second explanation understands āmīn as “O God, answer,” held by al-Ḥasan and al-Zajjāj. BAYDAWI: Āmīn is an imperative-like expression meaning “answer” or “grant the prayer”; it is not part of the Qur'an, by consensus. BAYDAWI-FULL: Āmīn is an imperative noun meaning “answer/accept”; a report from Ibn ʿAbbās says the Prophet explained it as “do so.” It is built on fatḥa to avoid two adjacent still consonants. NASAFI: Amin is a spoken formula meaning ‘answer/respond,’ treated as a noun for the imperative just as ruwayd means ‘wait.’ It has long and short forms; the short vowel length is original, while the long form lengthens the hamza. NASAFI reporting ابن عباس عن رسول الله: Ibn Abbas asked the Messenger about amin’s meaning, and he answered, ‘Do it.’ SAMIN-DURR: Amin is not part of the Quran by consensus; it means respond and is an indeclinable imperative noun. IBNKATHIR: It is recommended to say amin after al-Fatiha, pronounced either with a long or short first vowel; it means “O God, answer.” A report from Waʾil says the Prophet lengthened it, and al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan. IBNKATHIR reporting أبو موسى: A Prophetic report in Muslim says that when the imam recites “nor the astray,” worshippers should say amin and God will answer them. IBNKATHIR reporting ابن عباس: A report through Juwaybir and al-Dahhak explains amin as “Lord, do”; al-Jawhari says “so let it be,” al-Tirmidhi says it means do not disappoint our hope, and most interpreters say “O God, answer us.” IBNKATHIR: The account of Moses' prayer and the dual reply that “your two prayers” were answered implies that Harun said amin; this makes the person who says amin to a prayer like one who prayed it. | mentions 10:88, 10:89 BIQAI: Amīn is a vocal form named for the imperative meaning respond. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Amin means the petitioner trusts God not to reject the plea, since nothing can overcome or restrain Him; the word asks Him to respond. DURR reporting الحسن: Al-Ḥasan glosses Āmīn as “O God, answer.” DURR-FULL reporting الحسن: Ibn Shahin transmits Ubayy ibn Kab's variant with a repeated “ghayr” and amin; al-Hasan explains amin as “O God, respond.” ALUSI: Āmīn is an Arabic particle functioning as a verb, built on fatḥa to avoid meeting two quiescent letters; its correct meaning is respond, while another view gives it a broader sense including a synonym. ALUSI reporting قيل: Another view says Āmīn is used for a broader meaning that includes respond and its synonym. ALUSI-FULL: Amin is an Arabic indeclinable imperative-noun meaning “respond”; other views call it broader in meaning, foreign, a divine name, or a form with a doubled mīm, which the source discusses and disputes. ELMALILI: Amin is an imperative-like noun of action meaning 'answer' or 'accept'; it is not part of Qur'anic wording and therefore is not written in the codex. MUSLIM reporting أبو موسى الأشعري: Abu Musa says the Prophet taught worshippers to answer the recitation’s ending with Amin, so that God answers them; the teaching arose after a man spoke during prayer. NASAI reporting أبو موسى: Abū Mūsā reports that the Prophet taught worshippers to say amin after the imam recites 1:7, so God answers them. NASAI reporting أبو موسى: Ḥiṭṭān reports that a congregant declared prayer established through piety and almsgiving; Abū Mūsā recalled the Prophet’s rule to follow the imam, say amin after 1:7 for God’s answer, and mirror the imam’s movements."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p2", "position": "Āmīn seals the supplication", "reasons": "BAGHAWI: Another view calls Amin the seal of supplication. BAGHAWI: Another view says Amin is God's seal upon His servants, protecting them from afflictions like a letter's seal protects its contents. BAGHAWI-FULL: Other explanations call Amin the seal of a supplication or God’s seal protecting servants from harm, like a seal protecting a letter. KASHSHAF reporting النبي وجبريل: Gabriel taught the Prophet Amin at the end of al-Fatiha and called it a seal on a book. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said Gabriel taught him Amin upon finishing al-Fatiha and called it like a seal on a book; it is not Quran because absent from the codices. IBNATIYYA reporting علي بن أبي طالب: ʿAlī calls Āmīn the seal of the Lord of the worlds, with which the believing servant seals his supplication. IBNATIYYA: A further report calls Āmīn the name of a seal used to stamp the books of the people of Paradise, which they receive by faith. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting علي بن أبي طالب: ʿAli ibn Abi Talib calls amin the seal of the Lord of the worlds that closes a believing servant's supplication. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting رسول الله: The Prophet says a supplication is assured when sealed, and identifies amin as the seal. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Another report calls Amin the seal stamped on the books of the people of Paradise who receive them in faith. BAYDAWI: It is recommended to end the sūra with āmīn, following the Prophet's report that Gabriel taught it at the end of al-Fātiḥa as a letter's seal. BAYDAWI reporting علي: ʿAlī calls āmīn the seal of the Lord of the worlds, sealing a servant's supplication. BAYDAWI-FULL: Āmīn is not Qur'an, but ending the sura with it is recommended because Gabriel taught it to the Prophet as a seal on the book; ʿAlī similarly calls it the seal of the Lord of the worlds. NASAFI reporting النبي عليه السلام: The Prophet said Gabriel taught him amin after he finished reciting the Fatiha and compared it to a seal on a letter; amin is not Qur’an because it does not appear in the codices. NASAFI-FULL: The poet's evidence shows both long and short forms of Amin, and a Prophetic report says Gabriel taught Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, like a seal on a letter; it is not Qur'an because codices omit it. IBNKATHIR reporting أبو هريرة: Ibn Mardawayh transmits from Abu Hurayra a Prophetic report calling amin the Lord of the worlds' seal upon His believing servants. DURR reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Abū Zuhayr al-Numayrī, a Companion, likens Āmīn sealing supplication to a stamp; Abū Dāwūd grades the report ḥasan. DURR reporting أبو هريرة: A weak report calls Āmīn the seal of the Lord of the worlds upon believers’ tongues. DURR-FULL reporting أبو زهير النميري: Abu Zuhayr recommends ending supplication with amin, like a seal on a page; the Prophet said a persistent supplicant had secured an answer when he sealed his prayer."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p3", "position": "Āmīn means 'so be it'", "reasons": "BAGHAWI reporting ابن عباس وقتادة: Ibn ʿAbbas and Qatada explain Amin as “so it is” or “so be it.” BAGHAWI-FULL reporting ابن عباس وقتادة: Ibn Abbas and Qatada gloss Amin as ‘so be it.’ IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن الأنباري عن ابن عباس والحسن: One explanation makes āmīn mean “so be it,” as Ibn al-Anbārī relates from Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan. NASAFI-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Asked about Amin, Ibn Abbas reports that the Prophet explained it as “respond” or “so be it”; the word is a built verbal noun with long and short vowel forms."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p4", "position": "Āmīn is one of God's names", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA reporting الحسن بن أبي الحسن وأحمد بن يحيى ثعلب: Most scholars understand Āmīn as “O God, answer” or “Answer, Lord,” and al-Ḥasan and Thaʿlab are named for this explanation. ALUSI reporting قيل: Another unusual view treats Āmīn as a name of God because it contains a hidden pronoun referring to Him; al-Ālūsī finds this rationale even stranger. STUDYQURAN: Āmīn is commonly a supplication meaning O God, answer us; others call it a divine Name or say Thus shall it be, akin to Hebrew Amen as an affirmation and seal of prayer."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p5", "position": "Āmīn means 'Lord, do it'", "reasons": "BAYDAWI reporting رسول الله: Ibn ʿAbbās asked the Prophet about āmīn; he explained it as “do it” and said it is built on fatḥ to avoid meeting two quiescent sounds. DURR reporting ابن عباس: Through al-Ḍaḥḥāk, Ibn ʿAbbās says Āmīn means “Lord, do it.”"}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p6", "position": "Abu Hatim explains that matching the angels means saying amin sincerely for God, free of vanity, showing off, or desire for reputation, as the angels do.", "reasons": "IBNHIBBAN reporting أبو حاتم: Abu Hatim explains that matching the angels means saying amin sincerely for God, free of vanity, showing off, or desire for reputation, as the angels do."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p7", "position": "Amin means heading toward God, who is too generous to refuse one who heads to Him.", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting جعفر: Amin means heading toward God, who is too generous to refuse one who heads to Him."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p8", "position": "Amin means being content with God's decree for and against the servants.", "reasons": "SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Amin means being content with God's decree for and against the servants."}, {"id": "1:7/q27/p9", "position": "Amin means asking that the prayer be accepted; it is not part of Fatiha or a verse, and hadiths say the Prophet said it after Fatiha and instructed others to do so.", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Amin means asking that the prayer be accepted; it is not part of Fatiha or a verse, and hadiths say the Prophet said it after Fatiha and instructed others to do so."}]}
{"id": "1:7/q28", "question": "Is Āmīn part of the Qur'an?", "turns_on": "The cited reports, transmitted wording, and differing grammatical or legal inferences.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q28/p1", "position": "Amin is not Quran because it was not entered in the codi
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
