<<chunk 58, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "1:7/q31", "question": "Is Āmīn said aloud or quietly?", "turns_on": "The cited reports, transmitted wording, and differing grammatical or legal inferences.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q31/p1", "position": "Say Āmīn quietly", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting وائل بن حجر عن النبي: Wa'il reports that the Prophet said Amin quietly after al-Fatiha, placed his right hand over his left in prayer, and gave salutation to both sides. KASHSHAF reporting أبو حنيفة وأصحابه: The well-known position of Abu Hanifa and his followers is to say Amin silently. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting الحسن وأبو حنيفة: Hasan says the imam should not say Amin because he is the one supplicating; Abu Hanifa shares this view and is known to recite it quietly. IBNATIYYA reporting مالك: In the Mudawwana, Mālik says the imam does not say Āmīn, while followers say it quietly and a person praying alone says it. IBNATIYYA reporting مالك: Other reports from Mālik say that the imam says Āmīn either quietly or aloud, or does not say it during audible prayer. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting مالك: In the Mudawwana, the imam does not say amin; followers say it quietly, while a solitary worshipper does say it. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting مالك: A report from Malik allows the imam to say amin either silently or aloud. BAYDAWI reporting أبو حنيفة: A report from Abū Ḥanīfa says not to say āmīn; his better-known position is to say it quietly, as narrated from ʿAbd Allāh b. Mughaffal and Anas. IBNKATHIR: A third position has the follower say amin quietly in a small mosque, where the imam can be heard, and aloud in a large mosque so it reaches its far sides. ALUSI reporting الحسن: Al-Ḥasan says the imam should not say Āmīn because he is the supplicant; this is also found in a less famous report from Abū Ḥanīfa, whereas the famous view is that he says it silently. ALUSI-FULL reporting رسول الله: The Prophet instructed congregants to say amin after the imam recites the ending of al-Fatiha, saying God will love them; Hanafis say it quietly, while Shafiʿis say it aloud. ALUSI-FULL reporting علي وعبدالله بن مسعود: Quiet amin is attributed to ʿAli and Ibn Masʿud and is the Hanafi position; Shafiʿis vocalize it, Hasan says the imam should omit it, and one uncommon report from Abu Hanifa also favors concealment. ELMALILI: Amin is established by Sunna and should be said quietly by the imam, congregation, and a person praying alone. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Because sound hadiths support saying amin aloud after audible Fatiha, most legal schools adopt that practice; Hanafis always say it silently in prayer. STUDYQURAN: Sunnis customarily say Āmīn after the Fātiḥah; it is recommended, not obligatory, and scholars differ whether it should be said aloud or quietly."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p2", "position": "Say Āmīn aloud", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting وائل بن حجر: Wa'il saw the Prophet place his right hand over his left and raise his hands to his ears at the prayer's opening; the Prophet said Amin aloud after al-Fatiha. SULAMI reporting بعضهم: Anger follows innovations, while error is abandoning guidance and Sunnah, including the Sunnah of saying Amin aloud after the chapter in prayer. KASHSHAF reporting الشافعي: Al-Shafii holds Amin is said aloud. KASHSHAF reporting وائل بن حجر والنبي: Waʾil ibn Hujr reports that the Prophet said Amin aloud after wa-la al-dallin. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: Wail ibn Hujr reports that the Prophet said Amin aloud after reciting wa-la al-dallin. IBNATIYYA: The author infers from these reports that supplicants should say Āmīn at the end of every supplication and after al-Fātiḥa outside prayer, without loud recitation. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Given these reports, anyone praying or reciting al-Fatiha outside prayer should end the supplication with amin, but outside prayer it is not said aloud in the manner of formal recitation. BAYDAWI: The imam says āmīn aloud in audible prayers, based on the report that the Prophet raised his voice after al-ḍāllīn. IBNKATHIR reporting وائل بن حجر: Waʾil ibn Hujr reports hearing the Prophet say amin aloud after al-Fatiha; al-Tirmidhi grades the hadith hasan, and reports also come from ʿAli and Ibn Masʿud. IBNKATHIR reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayra reports that the Prophet said amin loudly enough for the first row to hear; Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah add that the mosque resounded, and al-Daraqutni calls the chain hasan. IBNKATHIR reporting القول الجديد: The new Shafiʿi position, also held by Abu Hanifa and one Maliki report, is that a follower does not say amin aloud when the imam does; it is a remembrance like other prayer remembrances. IBNKATHIR reporting القول القديم: The old Shafiʿi position, held by Ahmad and another Maliki report, is that the follower says amin aloud, based on the report that the mosque echoed with it. IBNKATHIR: Some use this reasoning to argue that the follower need not recite aloud behind the imam because amin after al-Fatiha counts as recitation; they cite “whoever has an imam, the imam's recitation is his recitation” and Bilal's request not to be preceded in amin. ALUSI reporting الحنفية: The Ḥanafīs conceal Āmīn, following ʿAlī and Ibn Masʿūd; the Shāfiʿīs say it aloud. The report of the majority’s loud recitation is interpreted as instruction or discussion. ABUDAWUD reporting أبو هريرة عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Abu Hurayra reports that when the Prophet recited al-Fatiha’s closing words, he said Amin loudly enough for the first row to hear. IBNMAJAH reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayra says people had stopped saying amin; the Prophet said it aloud after the Fatiha's closing words, loud enough for the first row to hear and the mosque to reverberate."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p3", "position": "Wāʾil b. Ḥujr heard the Prophet say Āmīn after al-Fātiḥa’s ending, prolonging his voice.", "reasons": "DURR reporting وائل بن حجر: Wāʾil b. Ḥujr heard the Prophet say Āmīn after al-Fātiḥa’s ending, prolonging his voice."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p4", "position": "Wail ibn Hujr heard the Prophet say amin after the final words of al-Fatiha, prolonging his voice.", "reasons": "DURR-FULL reporting وائل بن حجر: Wail ibn Hujr heard the Prophet say amin after the final words of al-Fatiha, prolonging his voice."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p5", "position": "Wail ibn Hujr reports that the Prophet recited “Amen” after “those astray,” prolonging his voice.", "reasons": "ITQAN reporting وائل بن حجر: Wail ibn Hujr reports that the Prophet recited “Amen” after “those astray,” prolonging his voice."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p6", "position": "Wāʾil b. Ḥujr reports that the Prophet recited the verse’s ending, said amin, and extended his voice on it.", "reasons": "TIRMIDHI reporting وائل بن حجر: Wāʾil b. Ḥujr reports that the Prophet recited the verse’s ending, said amin, and extended his voice on it."}, {"id": "1:7/q31/p7", "position": "Tirmidhi says many Companions, Successors, and later scholars, including al-Shāfiʿī, Aḥmad, and Isḥāq, hold that a man raises his voice when saying amin rather than hiding it.", "reasons": "TIRMIDHI: Tirmidhi says many Companions, Successors, and later scholars, including al-Shāfiʿī, Aḥmad, and Isḥāq, hold that a man raises his voice when saying amin rather than hiding it."}]}
{"id": "1:7/q32", "question": "What does agreement with the angels' Āmīn mean?", "turns_on": "The cited reports, transmitted wording, and differing grammatical or legal inferences.", "positions": [{"id": "1:7/q32/p1", "position": "Agreement is in receiving the answer", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting النبي عن أبي هريرة: When the imam finishes al-Fatiha, worshippers should say Amin; if their response coincides with the angels' and imam's, their past sins are forgiven."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p2", "position": "The Prophet instructs the congregation to say Amin after the imam's recitation; agreement with the angels' Amin brings forgiveness for past sins.", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting النبي عن أبي هريرة: The Prophet instructs the congregation to say Amin after the imam's recitation; agreement with the angels' Amin brings forgiveness for past sins."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p3", "position": "The Prophet teaches followers not to anticipate the imam, to say Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, and to answer ‘Our Lord, praise belongs to You’ after the imam says God hears praise; agreement with the angels…", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting النبي عن أبي هريرة: The Prophet teaches followers not to anticipate the imam, to say Amin at the end of al-Fatiha, and to answer ‘Our Lord, praise belongs to You’ after the imam says God hears praise; agreement with the angels brings forgiveness for those in the mosque."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p4", "position": "The Prophet instructs worshippers to say amin when the imam reaches the verse's ending; the imam and angels say it too, and agreement with the angels brings forgiveness of past sins.", "reasons": "IBNHIBBAN reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet instructs worshippers to say amin when the imam reaches the verse's ending; the imam and angels say it too, and agreement with the angels brings forgiveness of past sins."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p5", "position": "Agreement is in sincerity", "reasons": "IBNHIBBAN reporting أبو حاتم: Abu Hatim explains that matching the angels means saying amin sincerely for God, free of vanity, showing off, or desire for reputation, as the angels do."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p6", "position": "Abu Hurayra reports that when the imam says the final phrase, the congregation should say Amin; imam and angels also say it, and agreement with the angels brings forgiveness of past sins. Baghawi grades it sahih.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Abu Hurayra reports that when the imam says the final phrase, the congregation should say Amin; imam and angels also say it, and agreement with the angels brings forgiveness of past sins. Baghawi grades it sahih."}, {"id": "1:7/q32/p7", "position": "Abu Hurayra reports that when the imam says Amin, worshippers should do so too; angels also say
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
