<<chunk 74, part 1 of 0..5>>
LL, d. 745 (author): In the preferred syntax, في السماء modifies the verbal noun تقلب and في retains its ordinary meaning; a Qur'anic parallel uses the same preposition. | mentions 3:196 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers attachment to تقلب with في literal; the sky is linked to mercy and blessings, supplication, and the expected descent of Gabriel. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): في may attach to verbal noun تقلب with ordinary locative sense; it may mean إلى, but al-Samīn sees no need because this noun is attested with في, as in 3:196. | mentions 3:196"}, {"id": "2:144/q04/p3", "position": "Fi attaches to nara and means from heaven.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Another analysis attaches في السماء to نرى and takes في to mean من, meaning God sees the turning from heaven; the wording magnifies the event without implying divine localization. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): A second view attaches في to نرى and takes في to mean من; heaven is mentioned honorifically, not to claim God occupies a direction."}, {"id": "2:144/q04/p4", "position": "Fi has several attested extended senses in Arabic and the Quran.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Fi has several attested extended senses in Arabic and the Quran."}, {"id": "2:144/q04/p5", "position": "The sky phrase is a circumstantial qualifier of the face.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqāʾ makes في السماء an accusative حال from وجهك, attached to an omitted element."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q05", "question": "Why did the Prophet look toward heaven?", "turns_on": "Whether he awaited revelation, permission, or a promised change, and whether Jerusalem remained valid.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q05/p1", "position": "He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. TAB-FULL: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. ZAJJAJ: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. IBNABIHATIM: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. QUSHAYRI: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. WAHIDI-ASBAB: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. JISHUMI: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. BAGHAWI-FULL: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. KASHSHAF-FULL: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. IBNATIYYA-FULL: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. TABRISI: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. RAZI-FULL: He watched heaven for Gabriel and revelation concerning the qibla. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): Al-Suddī says that while praying toward Jerusalem, the Prophet raised his head toward the sky awaiting an instruction because he wished to pray toward the Kaʿba. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The Prophet looked heavenward in expectation of revelation changing the qibla; he anticipated the Kaaba as Abraham’s qibla, the older qibla, more inviting to Arabs, and a departure from Jewish practice, yet waited without asking, showing perfect courtesy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قتادة، السدي وغيرهما): Qatada, al-Suddī, and others say the Messenger repeatedly looked toward heaven while praying that God turn him toward Mecca. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): The Prophet watched for Gabriel and revelation to announce the change. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (البراء): Al-Barāʾ reports the Prophet repeatedly looked skyward awaiting the change; after the command Muslims asked about the dead and earlier prayers, the fools questioned it, and verses 2:143–142 followed. | mentions 2:143, 2:142 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو العالية): The report glosses the Prophet’s upward gaze as waiting for the answer he requested, and directs Muslims everywhere to turn in prayer toward the Kaaba. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet repeatedly turned his gaze toward the sky, awaiting revelation and expecting God to redirect him toward the Kaaba. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The Prophet repeatedly turned his gaze toward the sky, eagerly expecting revelation about the direction of prayer. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): In response to earlier indications, the Prophet awaited revelation for the qibla change, watched for Gabriel, and prayed for the Kaaba, the qibla of his father Abraham. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The Prophet looked toward heaven in expectation of revelation and hoped for a qibla that would honor him; this did not mean he disliked Jerusalem. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (روايات واردة في شأن نزول الآية): Reports about the occasion say Jews taunted and boasted that Muslims followed their qibla; grieving, the Prophet went out at night and waited for revelation, after which the verse came."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p2", "position": "He awaited fulfillment of a promised but unspecified change.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: He awaited fulfillment of a promised but unspecified change. TABRISI: He awaited fulfillment of a promised but unspecified change. RAZI-FULL: He awaited fulfillment of a promised but unspecified change."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p3", "position": "He looked toward the source of mercy, blessing, rain, and revelation.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: He looked toward the source of mercy, blessing, rain, and revelation. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The sky is singled out because things associated with it are held in special reverence and come from it, such as rain, mercy, and revelation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers attachment to تقلب with في literal; the sky is linked to mercy and blessings, supplication, and the expected descent of Gabriel."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p4", "position": "He feared prayer time after being barred from Jerusalem before another qibla was named.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: He feared prayer time after being barred from Jerusalem before another qibla was named. Against: JISHUMI: He feared prayer time after being barred from Jerusalem before another qibla was named. RAZI-FULL: He feared prayer time after being barred from Jerusalem before another qibla was named. Against: RAZI-FULL: He feared prayer time after being barred from Jerusalem before another qibla was named."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p5", "position": "He sought permission to supplicate.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: He sought permission to supplicate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Another view says he looked toward the sky in order to be permitted to pray."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p6", "position": "His heavenward look itself was a prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: His heavenward look itself was a prayer."}, {"id": "2:144/q05/p7", "position": "His look showed trust that God knew his unspoken wish.", "reasons": "SULAMI: His look showed trust that God knew his unspoken wish."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q06", "question": "Did the Prophet request the change, and on what terms?", "turns_on": "Whether he voiced a request, silently hoped, or required permission to ask.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q06/p1", "position": "He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God.", "reasons": "THALABI: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. WAHIDI-ASBAB: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. WAHIDI-BASIT: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. BAGHAWI-FULL: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. TABRISI: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. RAZI-FULL: He asked Gabriel about the change and was told to ask God. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Abū al-ʿĀliya reports that the Prophet wished God would turn him away from the Jews’ qibla and asked Gabriel about it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو العالية): Gabriel said he could act only by God’s command and told the Prophet to pray to God; the Prophet kept looking up until the revelation came. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): A report says the Prophet told Gabriel he wished God would turn him from the Jews' qibla; Gabriel replied that he too was God's servant and urged him to pray to his Lord. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet kept looking up in hope of Gabriel's answer, and God revealed this verse in response."}, {"id": "2:144/q06/p2", "position": "A prophetic request required divine permission and pursuit of benefit.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: A prophetic request required divine permission and pursuit of benefit. TABRISI: A prophetic request required divine permission and pursuit of benefit. RAZI-FULL: A prophetic request required divine permission and pursuit of benefit. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): On that account, the Prophet's request may have followed permission, since prophets do not ask without authorization lest an ungranted request become a trial for their people. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): An unnamed report says the Prophet asked Gabriel for permission to pray, and Gabriel told him God had permitted it. Against: ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi rejects the need for explicit permission: the Prophet could ask for a religious benefit he understood, given his exceptional nearness to God; any admonition addressed hidden wisdom, not a lapse in his manners."}, {"id": "2:144/q06/p3", "position": "He did not explicitly ask; God answered his unspoken hope.", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI: He did not explicitly ask; God answered his unspoken hope. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The Prophet looked heavenward in expectation of revelation changing the qibla; he anticipated the Kaaba as Abraham’s qibla, the older qibla, more inviting to Arabs, and a departure from Jewish practice, yet waited without asking, showing perfect courtesy. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says the Prophet inwardly wanted the Kaaba, a qibla for all people, but relied on God's knowing his wish rather than asking; for one who asks, prayer obtains a need, while reliance on God's knowledge
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
