<<chunk 74, part 2 of 0..5>>
 is worship. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi thinks the Prophet awaited the change without explicitly asking; the verse's failure to mention a request suggests this and reflects his perfect propriety. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Despite allowing that he could have asked, Al-Alusi thinks he did not explicitly pray in this incident: sound reports show only his desire for the change."}, {"id": "2:144/q06/p4", "position": "He could privately hope for a change without disobeying the former command.", "reasons": "Against: RAZI-FULL: He could privately hope for a change without disobeying the former command. RAZI-FULL: He could privately hope for a change without disobeying the former command."}, {"id": "2:144/q06/p5", "position": "He prayed to God for the change.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (قتادة والسدي وغيرهما): Qatada, al-Suddi, and others say the Prophet repeatedly prayed to God to change the qibla to the Kaaba."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q07", "question": "What prayer direction did the Prophet face in Mecca and Medina before this command?", "turns_on": "Reports differ about how the Kaaba and Jerusalem were aligned before migration.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q07/p1", "position": "In Mecca he faced Jerusalem with the Kaaba between himself and it.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: In Mecca he faced Jerusalem with the Kaaba between himself and it. TABRISI: In Mecca he faced Jerusalem with the Kaaba between himself and it. RAZI-FULL: In Mecca he faced Jerusalem with the Kaaba between himself and it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that at Mecca the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem with the Kaaba before him; after moving to Medina he did so for sixteen months before being turned to the Kaaba."}, {"id": "2:144/q07/p2", "position": "He faced the Kaaba in Mecca and Jerusalem after migration.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: He faced the Kaaba in Mecca and Jerusalem after migration. TABRISI: He faced the Kaaba in Mecca and Jerusalem after migration. RAZI-FULL: He faced the Kaaba in Mecca and Jerusalem after migration. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الجمهور): The majority say the Prophet faced the Kaaba in Mecca when prayer was prescribed, then turned toward Jerusalem after reaching Medina to accommodate the Jews; Ibn Ashur calls that stated motive weak."}, {"id": "2:144/q07/p3", "position": "He faced Jerusalem already in Mecca, without requiring Kaaba alignment.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: He faced Jerusalem already in Mecca, without requiring Kaaba alignment. TABRISI: He faced Jerusalem already in Mecca, without requiring Kaaba alignment. RAZI-FULL: He faced Jerusalem already in Mecca, without requiring Kaaba alignment."}, {"id": "2:144/q07/p4", "position": "alignment", "reasons": "Against: IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (بعضهم): A further view says he faced Jerusalem from a place where the Kaaba lay eastward, so he faced both; Ibn Ashur says this view is unsound."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q08", "question": "Was the earlier Jerusalem direction chosen or commanded?", "turns_on": "Whether Jerusalem was divinely commanded or selected by the Prophet.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q08/p1", "position": "God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. THALABI: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. WAHIDI-BASIT: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. JISHUMI: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. BAGHAWI-FULL: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. RAZI-FULL: God commanded the Jerusalem direction before changing it. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the qibla was the first Qur'anic abrogation: after migration, the Prophet faced Jerusalem for over a year at God's command, though he loved Abraham's qibla and prayed looking skyward; the change unsettled the Jews, and God had tested who followed the Messenger. | mentions 2:142, 2:115, 2:143 ITQAN, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that after the Hijra the Prophet faced Jerusalem for thirteen months at God's command, though he longed for Abraham's qibla; after the qibla changed, Jewish critics asked what had turned him from his former direction, and 2:142 answered them. | mentions 2:115 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet faced the Kaaba in Mecca; after migration God directed him toward Jerusalem for Jewish acceptance. He prayed that way for sixteen months while expecting a return to Abraham's qibla. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The verse implies Muslims changed from one prayer direction to another; because the destination was the Kaaba, the prior direction was Jerusalem, as the reports confirm. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الجمهور): The majority say the Prophet faced the Kaaba in Mecca when prayer was prescribed, then turned toward Jerusalem after reaching Medina to accommodate the Jews; Ibn Ashur calls that stated motive weak. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas and the majority say God commanded the Prophet by revelation to face Jerusalem and later abrogated it for the Kaaba, citing the verse about the former qibla. | mentions 2:143 STUDYQURAN (author): The change of qiblah was ordained by God, though commentators differ about how Jerusalem first became the qiblah and how the change occurred. STUDYQURAN (most commentators): Most accounts say God first instructed the Prophet to face Jerusalem and later commanded him to turn toward Makkah."}, {"id": "2:144/q08/p2", "position": "The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice. THALABI: The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice. WAHIDI-BASIT: The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice. RAZI-FULL: The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice. Against: RAZI-FULL: The Prophet chose Jerusalem to draw Jews or follow earlier scriptural practice. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the Prophet faced Jerusalem for seventeen months to win Jewish belief and following and draw in the Arabs; then the qibla changed, alongside the wording of 2:115. | mentions 2:115 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عثمان بن عبد الرحمن): ʿUthmān b. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān reports that the Prophet awaited direction about the qibla and had adopted some People-of-the-Book practices that were neither commanded nor forbidden. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الطبري): Al-Tabari says the Prophet could choose either the Kaaba or Jerusalem and chose Jerusalem to accommodate the Jews. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الحسن وعكرمة وأبو العالية): Al-Hasan, Ikrima, and Abu al-Aliya attribute the Jerusalem direction to the Prophet’s own judgment: he followed the prior two religions’ qibla while wishing for a command to face the Kaaba. STUDYQURAN (author): The change of qiblah was ordained by God, though commentators differ about how Jerusalem first became the qiblah and how the change occurred. STUDYQURAN (a few commentators): A few say the Prophet chose Jerusalem on his own to establish a bond with local Jews and recent converts to Islam."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q09", "question": "How long was Jerusalem the Prophet's qibla after migration?", "turns_on": "The transmitted month counts differ.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q09/p1", "position": "Sixteen months after migration.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ: Sixteen months after migration. TAB-FULL: Sixteen months after migration. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Sixteen months after migration. KASHSHAF-FULL: Sixteen months after migration. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (روي): A report says the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen months after arriving in Medina, then the qibla changed in Rajab, two months before Badr. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib reports in the Muwaṭṭaʾ that the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen months after arriving in Medina and the qibla changed two months before Badr. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that at Mecca the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem with the Kaaba before him; after moving to Medina he did so for sixteen months before being turned to the Kaaba. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (سعد بن أبي وقاص): Saʿd b. Abī Waqqāṣ reports that the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen months and shifted to the Sacred Mosque two months before Badr. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿīd b. al-Musayyib says the Anṣār prayed toward the first qibla for three years before the Prophet arrived, and he prayed that way sixteen months after arriving. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (معاذ بن جبل): One report from Muʿādh b. Jabal gives the Prophet’s Jerusalem-facing period after arrival in Medina as sixteen months. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (قتادة): Qatāda calls the qibla a test: the Anṣār faced the first qibla for two years before the Prophet, who faced Jerusalem for sixteen months in Medina before the Kaaba; critics said he longed for home. | mentions 2:142 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet faced the Kaaba in Mecca; after migration God directed him toward Jerusalem for Jewish acceptance. He prayed that way for sixteen months while expecting a return to Abraham's qibla. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (البراء): Al-Bara reports that the Muslims prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen months after reaching Medina, then God revealed the verse, knowing the Prophet's desire. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (براء بن عازب): The Prophet arrived in Medina, prayed toward Bayt al-Maqdis for sixteen months, and was then turned toward the Kaaba."}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p2", "position": "Sixteen or seventeen months after migration.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ: Sixteen or seventeen months after migration. IBNABIHATIM: Sixteen or seventeen months after migration. BAGHAWI-FULL: Sixteen or seventeen months after migration. TABRISI: Sixteen or seventeen months after migration. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (البراء): Al-Barāʾ reports that the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen or seventeen mon
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
