<<chunk 74, part 3 of 0..5>>
ths and wished to face the Kaʿba before this revelation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (البراء بن عازب): The Prophet faced Jerusalem for sixteen or seventeen months after arriving in Medina, wished to face the Kaaba, and then received the revelation directing him toward it; Jews asked what had turned them from their former qibla. | mentions 2:144 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (البراء بن عازب): Al-Bara' reports the Prophet faced Jerusalem for sixteen or seventeen months; after the change during the afternoon prayer, a man informed another congregation, who turned toward the House while still bowing. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (البراء بن عازب): A second route from al-Bara' says the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for sixteen or seventeen months, wished to turn toward the Kaaba, and was redirected when this verse was revealed. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (البراء): Al-Barāʾ gives the Jerusalem-facing period as sixteen or seventeen months. ITQAN, d. 911 (البراء): Al-Baraʾ's Ṣaḥīḥayn report says the qibla change came after sixteen or seventeen months; the first prayer toward the Kaʿba was ʿAsr, supporting a daytime revelation between noon and ʿAsr."}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p3", "position": "Seventeen months after migration.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Seventeen months after migration. THALABI: Seventeen months after migration. WAHIDI-BASIT: Seventeen months after migration. TABRISI: Seventeen months after migration. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the Prophet faced Jerusalem for seventeen months to win Jewish belief and following and draw in the Arabs; then the qibla changed, alongside the wording of 2:115. | mentions 2:115 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (معاذ بن جبل): Mu'adh says the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for seventeen months after arriving in Medina, then God commanded the turn toward the Ka'ba."}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p4", "position": "Eighteen months after migration.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ: Eighteen months after migration. TAB-FULL: Eighteen months after migration. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (البراء بن عازب): Al-Bara reports that after eighteen months praying toward Jerusalem in Medina, Muhammad's longing for the Ka'ba was answered by the qibla change; he asked about earlier prayers, and 2:143 assured him they were preserved."}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p5", "position": "Thirteen months after migration.", "reasons": "TABRISI: Thirteen months after migration. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (معاذ بن جبل): A separate report from Muʿādh b. Jabal gives the period as thirteen months. ITQAN, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that after the Hijra the Prophet faced Jerusalem for thirteen months at God's command, though he longed for Abraham's qibla; after the qibla changed, Jewish critics asked what had turned him from his former direction, and 2:142 answered them. | mentions 2:115"}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p6", "position": "Nine or ten months after migration.", "reasons": "TABRISI: Nine or ten months after migration. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أنس): Anas reports nine or ten months; during noon prayer, after two rakʿas toward Jerusalem, the Prophet turned to the Kaaba and questioners asked why. | mentions 2:142"}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p7", "position": "Seven months in Medina, after thirteen years in Mecca.", "reasons": "TABRISI: Al-Sadiq says thirteen years in Mecca and seven months in Medina, then Gabriel turned the Prophet during Banu Salim noon prayer."}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p8", "position": "Six or seventeen months, as transmitted.", "reasons": "DURR-FULL, d. 911 (البراء بن عازب): Al-Barāʾ reports that the Prophet first prayed toward Jerusalem for six or seventeen months; after he turned toward the Kaaba, another congregation turned while bowing, and the community wondered about those who died before the change, leading to reassurance in 2:143. | mentions 2:143"}, {"id": "2:144/q09/p9", "position": "Ten months after migration.", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): A report says the Prophet prayed toward Jerusalem for ten months after arriving in Medina, then was turned toward the Kaʿba; no authority or grading is given."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q10", "question": "Why did the Prophet desire the Kaaba as qibla?", "turns_on": "The notes offer several compatible motives, especially Abraham's qibla, Jewish taunts, and inviting Arabs.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q10/p1", "position": "He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets.", "reasons": "MUQATIL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. TAB-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. IBNABIHATIM: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. THALABI: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. MAWARDI-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. WAHIDI-BASIT: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. JISHUMI: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. BAGHAWI-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. KASHSHAF-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. IBNATIYYA-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. TABRISI: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. RAZI-FULL: He wanted the qibla of Abraham and the earlier prophets. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The Prophet looked heavenward in expectation of revelation changing the qibla; he anticipated the Kaaba as Abraham’s qibla, the older qibla, more inviting to Arabs, and a departure from Jewish practice, yet waited without asking, showing perfect courtesy. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The Prophet expected to be turned toward the Kaʿba, to follow Abraham, distinguish himself from the Jews, and attract Arabs to faith because the sanctuary was their pride and pilgrimage center. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī says the Prophet expected a change to the Kaaba, Abraham's qibla, which would attract Arabs through their pride and pilgrimage sites and oppose the Jews. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas's explanation is that the Prophet sought the qibla of Abraham. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the qibla was the first Qur'anic abrogation: after migration, the Prophet faced Jerusalem for over a year at God's command, though he loved Abraham's qibla and prayed looking skyward; the change unsettled the Jews, and God had tested who followed the Messenger. | mentions 2:142, 2:115, 2:143 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the qibla was the first abrogation: after migration to a largely Jewish city, the Prophet faced Jerusalem while longing for Abraham’s qibla; the Jews questioned the change, and 2:115 was also revealed. | mentions 2:115 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): He longed for the Kaaba as Abraham's qibla and the older qibla, and because it could draw Arabs toward faith through its prestige as sanctuary, pilgrimage site, and place of security. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): He hoped God would turn him toward th\n\n\n\ne Kaaba because Jews taunted him for following their qibla, and because it was Abraham's and the older qibla, more likely to draw Arabs to faith. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): In response to earlier indications, the Prophet awaited revelation for the qibla change, watched for Gabriel, and prayed for the Kaaba, the qibla of his father Abraham. STUDYQURAN (R): Others explain the Prophet's hope by his love of Abraham's House and qiblah, or by hoping the Arabs would be more inclined to Islam if the Kaʿbah were the qiblah."}, {"id": "2:144/q10/p2", "position": "He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. THALABI: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. MAWARDI-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. WAHIDI-BASIT: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. JISHUMI: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. BAGHAWI-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. KASHSHAF-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. IBNATIYYA-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. TABRISI: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. RAZI-FULL: He wanted to end Jewish taunts and distinguish his community from theirs. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The Prophet looked heavenward in expectation of revelation changing the qibla; he anticipated the Kaaba as Abraham’s qibla, the older qibla, more inviting to Arabs, and a departure from Jewish practice, yet waited without asking, showing perfect courtesy. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The Prophet expected to be turned toward the Kaʿba, to follow Abraham, distinguish himself from the Jews, and attract Arabs to faith because the sanctuary was their pride and pilgrimage center. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī says the Prophet expected a change to the Kaaba, Abraham's qibla, which would attract Arabs through their pride and pilgrimage sites and oppose the Jews. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مجاهد): Mujāhid says the Prophet sought to oppose Jews who claimed he had no settled religion until he followed them. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (مجاهد): Mujāhid reports that Jews claimed Muhammad opposed them while following their qibla; after he asked God for a qibla and the Kaaba was appointed, their claim ended and men and women exchanged places. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet also disliked following the Jewish qibla because Jews taunted that he followed their religion's direction and would not know where to face without them. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): He hoped God would turn him toward th\n\n\n\ne Kaaba because Jews taunted him for following their qibla, and because it was Ab
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
