<<chunk 75, part 2 of 0..5>>
t site is inaccessible from afar and would impose hardship. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Naming the Sacred Mosque rather than the Kaaba shows that a distant worshipper need only align with the qibla's direction, not hit the Kaaba's exact point. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو حنيفة وأحمد وأكثر الخراسانيين من الشافعية): Abu Hanifa, Ahmad, most Khurasani Shafi'is, and al-Ghazali in the Ihya hold that a distant worshipper faces the direction of the Kaaba. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Turning the face or body away from the Kaaba invalidates prayer, while someone far away need not face the Kaaba's exact physical point. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The wording commands facing the direction of the Sacred Mosque rather than the Kaaba itself, since the mosque is the sacred precinct around the Kaaba. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The majority of exegetes, including Companions, Successors and later scholars, hold that distant worshippers need only face the direction of the Sacred Mosque, while people in Mecca or inside it must face some side of the Kaaba."}, {"id": "2:144/q21/p2", "position": "The whole House is the qibla, without privileging one point.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The whole House is the qibla, without privileging one point. MAWARDI-FULL: The whole House is the qibla, without privileging one point. JISHUMI: The whole House is the qibla, without privileging one point. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The whole House is the qibla, without privileging one point. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbā\n\n\n\ns says the direction is aligned with the whole House; Ibn ʿUmar says it is aligned with the Kaʿba's rainspout, as reported by Ibn ʿAṭiyya. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عباس وغيرُه): Ibn Abbas and others say the Messenger was directed toward the entire House. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the entire House is a qibla, and the doorway of the House is a qibla."}, {"id": "2:144/q21/p3", "position": "Prayer requires aiming at the Kaaba's exact physical point.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Prayer requires aiming at the Kaaba's exact physical point. RAZI-FULL: Prayer requires aiming at the Kaaba's exact physical point. RAZI-FULL: The Prophet prayed two rakas outside the House, faced it, and called it the qibla. RAZI-FULL: Al-Shafi'i reads the report as identifying the House itself as target. RAZI-FULL: Repeated reports of veneration and prayer's gravity support exact alignment. RAZI-FULL: Certainty about the Kaaba and doubt about other targets warrant caution. RAZI-FULL: Shafi'i followers object that the literal span would include the north pole. RAZI-FULL: They interpret the span using winter sunrise and summer sunset as bounds for Mecca's bearing. RAZI-FULL: The Shafi'i rule invalidates a long row for worshippers outside direct alignment. RAZI-FULL: Al-Shafi'i says facing someone's side normally requires direct opposition. RAZI-FULL: An objection models all rows as curved points on an immense circle around the House. RAZI-FULL: An objector distinguishes probable facing from certainty and says only the latter needs geometry. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعضهم): Some jurists held that an absent worshipper must face the Kaaba itself rather than only its direction. Against: QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن العربي): Ibn al-Arabi rejects requiring the Kaaba itself as an impracticable obligation. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (الشافعي): One of al-Shafiʿi's two positions requires facing the Kaaba itself, based on reports specifying its line or the direction of its mizab. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (العراقيون والقفال): The Iraqi Shafi'is and al-Qaffal require facing the Kaaba's exact point. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Cübbâî): The Mu'tazili Jubbai holds that prayer must face the Kaaba's half, so facing one of its edges is insufficient. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Kādî Abdülcebbâr): The Mu'tazili Qadi Abd al-Jabbar holds that prayer must face the Kaaba's half, so facing one of its edges is insufficient."}, {"id": "2:144/q21/p4", "position": "Facing the qibla is a condition of obligatory prayer.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Facing the qibla is a condition of obligatory prayer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): There is no disagreement that the Kaaba is the qibla for people in every region. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Turning the face or body away from the Kaaba invalidates prayer, while someone far away need not face the Kaaba's exact physical point. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): These commands establish the obligation to face the Kaaba in prayer. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الباقر عليه السلام): Al-Bāqir explains “turn your face toward the Sacred Mosque” as facing the qibla and warns that turning away from it invalidates prayer. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The change had major religious and political importance: the Prophet yearned for the Kaaba in his homeland Mecca, which he had been forced to leave, and God fulfilled his wish; from then on Muslims were obligated to pray toward the Sacred Mosque."}, {"id": "2:144/q21/p5", "position": "One who sees the Kaaba must face it exactly.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Consensus requires exact facing for one who sees it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو عمر): Scholars agree that the Kaʿba is the qibla in every region; anyone who sees it and knows its direction must face it, and prayer performed while knowingly facing away must be repeated. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī adduces Arab poetry to show that شطر means aiming at the very object when it is visible, and determining its direction through judgment when unseen."}, {"id": "2:144/q21/p6", "position": "The binding orientation applies to prayer, especially obligatory prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Outside prayer, orientation is meritorious, with the report that the best gatherings face qibla. RAZI-FULL: The binding command is specific to prayer. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Numerous reports show that the qibla command was revealed for obligatory prayer and applies specifically to it."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q22", "question": "Does the qibla single out the Kaaba's waterspout or door?", "turns_on": "Whether the specific line is the waterspout or the House as a whole.", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q22/p1", "position": "The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. TAB-FULL: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. IBNABIHATIM: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. MAWARDI-FULL: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. Against: JISHUMI: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The direction singled out is opposite the Kaaba's waterspout. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbā\n\n\n\ns says the direction is aligned with the whole House; Ibn ʿUmar says it is aligned with the Kaʿba's rainspout, as reported by Ibn ʿAṭiyya. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عمر): Ibn ʿUmar says the Prophet and his community faced the line of the Kaaba's waterspout, the qibla for Medina, Syria, and approximately Andalusia. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Another Ibn ʿAbbas report says that after praying toward Jerusalem the Prophet raised his head to heaven; God revealed the change toward the Kaaba, with Gabriel directing him toward its water-spout. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عبد الله بن عمرو): Yahya b. Qumta saw ʿAbd Allah b. ʿAmr facing toward the Kaaba's mizab and explaining that the commanded direction was toward it; al-Hakim graded the chain sound and said the two compilers did not include it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عمرو): ʿAbd Allāh b. ʿAmr identifies the desired qibla as Abraham’s qibla, toward the mizāb."}, {"id": "2:144/q22/p2", "position": "The House's door indicates its qibla.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The House's door indicates its qibla. MAWARDI-FULL: The House's door indicates its qibla. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the entire House is a qibla, and the doorway of the House is a qibla."}, {"id": "2:144/q22/p3", "position": "The waterspout line applies especially to Medina, Syria, and Andalusia.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: The waterspout line applies especially to Medina, Syria, and Andalusia."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q23", "question": "How does the qibla target vary with the worshipper's location?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:144/q23/p1", "position": "The target expands from House to mosque to sanctuary for increasingly distant worshippers.", "reasons": "THALABI: The target expands from House to mosque to sanctuary for increasingly distant worshippers. TABRISI: The target expands from House to mosque to sanctuary for increasingly distant worshippers. RAZI-FULL: The target expands from House to mosque to sanctuary for increasingly distant worshippers. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): A report from Ibn ʿAbbās through ʿAṭāʾ says the Kaʿba is the direction for the mosque, the mosque for the sanctuary, and the sanctuary for people across the earth. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عباس، مالك): Ibn Abbas's hierarchy, also attributed to Mālik, makes the House the qibla for mosque-goers, the mosque for people of the sanctuary, and the sanctuary for people in east and west. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (النبي ﷺ): A report quoted by al-Qu\n\n\n\nrtubi from Ibn ʿAbbas says the qibla is between east and west for mosque-goers, the mosque for people of the Haram, and the Haram for people across the earth. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): A Prophetic report from Ibn ʿAbbās sets nested qibla zones: the House for mosque-goers, the mosque for the Sacred Precinct, and the precinct for people across the earth. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (مالك): Malik says the Kaaba is the qibla for people in the mosque, the mosque for Makkans, the Haram for Makkah, and Makkah's sanctuary for the world. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن عباس): A Prophetic report from Ibn Abbas supports the tiered qibla view; the disagreement concerns those not physically present, since present worshippers must face the Kaaba exactly by consensus."}]}
{"id": "2:144/q24", "ques
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
