<<chunk 77, part 5 of 0..5>>
d, and the verse was revealed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that Jews of Medina asked Muhammad how their Lord could hear their supplication, prompting the revelation. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): A report from Ibn Abbas says Jews asked how their Lord could hear prayer if heaven was five hundred years away and each heaven equally thick; the verse was revealed. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عبيد): When 40:60 was revealed, people asked how they could reach God to call upon Him; this verse was revealed in response."}, {"id": "2:186/q01/p5", "position": "Fasting breaches and repentance preceded the verse.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. THALABI, d. 427 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed about Umar ibn al-Khattab and his Companions having intercourse with their wives on Ramadan nights; their story will follow later. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (مقاتل): Muqatil connects the verse to early fasting rules: after sleeping, one man ate and another had intercourse, then they asked how to repent. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (مقاتل): Muqatil says the verse followed Umar's intercourse with his wife after the night prayer, his regret and tears, and his report to the Prophet before the concession was revealed."}, {"id": "2:186/q01/p6", "position": "Jews or polytheists questioned how God could hear across the heavens.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (المشركون): The polytheists objected that God could not be near when seven immense heavens lay between them and Him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): A report says the response clause was revealed after people questioned how God could be near with seven thick heavens between them; it clarifies nearness as answering and power."}, {"id": "2:186/q01/p7", "position": "A question about whether God hears prayer prompted it.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): An attribute-focused question might ask whether God hears prayer, which names may be used, or whether prayer may be offered in any manner; Razi cites the instruction about moderate prayer volume. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (علي): Ali reports that after the Prophet urged people not to tire of prayer and cited 40:60, a man asked whether God hears supplication; this verse was revealed. SUYUTI-LUBAB, d. 911 (علي): Ali reports that after the Prophet urged people not to tire of supplication, a man asked whether God hears prayer; the verse was then revealed."}, {"id": "2:186/q01/p8", "position": "People asked where to direct their supplication.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (مجاهد): Mujahid says that after hearing the command to call on God, people asked where to call Him; the command is 40:60. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (مجاهد): Mujahid says the question was where to direct supplication."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q02", "question": "Who are 'My servants'?", "turns_on": "The unqualified possessive favors a broad address; some narrow it by their chosen occasion of revelation.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q02/p1", "position": "The address includes all servants.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says every servant who prays is answered: worldly provision is granted if it is allotted to him, otherwise it is stored for him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): “My servants” is apparently general, though some restrict it to Jews or to believers according to the disputed occasion of revelation. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): God is near to His servants, present at every time and place; transcendent greatness does not require spatial distance. The author links this nearness to 56:85, 50:16, and 8:24. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): In this usage, عبادي with yā denotes more people than عبادِ without it: all servants ask or face death, while the addressed muttaqūn and patient are a smaller group. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The explicit yā in عبادي suits the verse because every servant may ask God, so the address encompasses all servants."}, {"id": "2:186/q02/p2", "position": "It addresses believers.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The command to believe is not a new conversion, since the passage addresses believers; it instead calls for lasting faith, sincerity, or belief in God’s promised answer."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
