<<chunk 78, part 1 of 0..3>>
is direct prayer answer with ordinary narratives introduced by a command to Muhammad to recount them, citing 5:27, 7:175, 19:51, 19:54, 19:56, 15:51, 12:3, and 18:13. He also distinguishes four answer forms: qul, fa-qul, a question left without a stated answer, and an answer with neither formula, citing the question passages in 2:217, 2:219, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1, 18:83, 10:53, 4:176, 7:187, and 20:105 alongside this verse."}, {"id": "2:186/q04/p2", "position": "God's own speech is conveyed through the Messenger without making him a barrier.", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Biqai cites the Prophet’s duty of communication to frame his recitation as conveying God’s own message directly to the community. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says the Prophet recites God's words so the community hears its Lord directly; the Prophet connects servants to God rather than standing as a barrier between them."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q05", "question": "What does 'I am near' mean?", "turns_on": "The sources distinguish knowledge, hearing, ready response, favor, and absolute ownership; several reject spatial nearness, while one report states God is upon the Throne.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q05/p1", "position": "God is near by quickly answering supplication.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): One interpretation is that God is near to answering supplication. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Ajibu may be parsed as accusative circumstantial, meaning I am near while answering; its future form is marked nominative by its initial prefix. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Alternatively, ajibu may start a new clause or attach to qarib as its adjective, meaning near and answering. DAMGHANI, d. 478 (author): Qarīb means responsive: God is near in the sense of answering those who call upon Him. JISHUMI, d. 494 (قيل): Some take the answer to be God's statement that He is near; others take it to be that He answers. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (author): God’s nearness represents how easily and quickly He answers callers’ needs, like someone nearby who promptly responds. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): God is near in His ability and in answering supplication. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A counterreading takes the question to concern God's action—whether He answers and fulfills requests—because the statement about nearness is followed by a promise to answer prayer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): If people ask about the One they worship, tell them He is near, rewards obedience, answers the supplicant, and knows a servant's fasting, prayer, and other deeds. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): One explanation is that God is near in answering prayer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The fāʾ in “I am near” answers the conditional; an omitted “say to them” is needed because the consequence is the report of nearness, not nearness itself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): A report says the response clause was revealed after people questioned how God could be near with seven thick heavens between them; it clarifies nearness as answering and power. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): After worshippers glorify God, the passage stresses His nearness and response to supplication, asks them to answer His call, continue in faith, and thereby hope for right guidance. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Nearness is metaphorical for the speed of answering a caller, since God transcends bodily proximity and place; Q 50:16 and the cited report illustrate the wording. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): Al-Zarkashī raises why this answer begins directly with God’s nearness instead of the usual قل, as in the answer about the new moons; this excerpt leaves the question open. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The response answers God's call to nearness and to His House, prompted by the servants’ innate need for Him. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (أعرابي): An Arab Bedouin asked the Prophet whether their Lord was near, so they could whisper to Him, or far, so they should call aloud; the verse was revealed to answer. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): God's answering the supplicant explains and confirms His nearness; the direct transition conveys intimacy, and “when” promises an answer in general rather than a guaranteed fulfillment of every request. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Unlike the other answers, God replies directly without saying qul or faqul, omitting the intermediary and expressing nearness through His promise to answer prayer. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God is the absolute Greatest, present everywhere, able to meet every need, and nearer to people than they are to themselves; He explicitly promises to answer prayer. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): After the fasting commands, God reassures the Messenger that He is near and answers those who call; this directs attention to supplication, especially in the state of fasting. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God's nearness means that He promptly answers the person who calls on Him, not that He is near in place or direction. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): The instruction is to tell them that God is near when they ask about Him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Since God's established way does not change, the nearness He grants the servant means He will not drive that servant from His bounty and mercy. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The verse says God is near to the servant, not that the servant is near to God: a contingent being is rooted in nonexistence and cannot approach God by itself, but God draws near through grace and mercy. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): One interpretation takes near to mean that God answers a supplicant quickly, since nearness and speed are related."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p2", "position": "God is near through His knowledge and encompassing awareness.", "reasons": "THALABI, d. 427 (أهل المعاني): Ahl al-maʿānī see an ellipsis in the address and take nearness to mean nearness in knowledge. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (أهل المعاني): The scholars of meaning interpret nearness as God's knowledge, as in 58:7 and 57:4, where He is with people through knowledge. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): An omitted instruction is understood: tell them God is near to them in knowledge, with nothing hidden from Him; the same idea appears at 50:16. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer brings nearness when the caller becomes absorbed in knowledge of the One and turns from all else; attention to personal aims obstructs nearness, making supplication the best worship. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another explanation is that God is near through His knowledge. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): God's nearness represents the perfection of His knowledge, awareness, and observation of people's words, deeds, and circumstances. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): The divine nearness in both verses is interpreted as nearness by knowledge. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): God's nearness means closeness in knowledge and encompassing awareness, a metaphor for His full knowledge of people's acts and states, not spatial proximity, which would place Him near some and far from others. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): God's nearness is metaphorical, since spatial proximity is impossible for Him; it denotes His knowledge of servants' acts and words and awareness of their states."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p3", "position": "God is near by hearing supplication.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): The other interpretation is that God is near to hearing supplication. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says ajibu here means I hear: nearness suggests hearing, and response can mean hearing because hearing precedes an answer; not responding may mean not hearing. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another interpretation says God hears an invoker as a nearby person hears them; nearness of distance itself is impossible for God because it belongs to created beings situated in a place. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The second sense is answering: God's 'I am near' means that He responds, as does 'He is all-hearing, near.' RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): After the fasting rulings, magnification, and gratitude, God's nearness assures worshippers that He knows their remembrance, hears their call, answers prayer, and does not disappoint hope. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The question about God could concern His essence, attributes, or actions: spatial nearness, whether and how He hears or permits supplication, or whether He grants what is requested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): God’s nearness cannot be spatial; it means He hears invocation and promptly grants the petitioner’s request, figuratively like someone nearby who quickly answers. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī denies physical distance or proximity for God; spiritual nearness depends on hearing God's own address, while mediation through sensory experience makes one more distant in degree. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Since people hear and answer one another's hope
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
