<<chunk 78, part 2 of 0..3>>
s and requests, they must believe that God, nearer to them than they are to themselves, hears their prayers even sooner."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p4", "position": "God is near in knowledge, hearing, power, care, and response without occupying a place.", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): God is near all through knowledge, power, hearing, and sight, and especially near believers through care, victory, and answered prayer, never by essence or place. WAHIDI-WAJIZ, d. 468 (author): God's nearness means nearness by knowledge, and answering a caller means hearing the caller. JISHUMI, d. 494 (قيل): Other explanations say God is near in answering, quick to answer, in hearing, or in knowledge and power. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): God's nearness here is not spatial; it means nearness through knowledge and preservation. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Nonspatial nearness means that God hears supplications, sees pleading, and is near through knowledge and preservation; Razi compares this with God's being with people and nearer than the jugular vein. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): God is near in knowledge and answering prayer, not spatial location, since He is exalted above being located. ZAJJAJ (author): God is near and no place is devoid of Him; 58:7 and 57:4 support it. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): Divine nearness is not directional or tied to a place: God is exalted above spatial approach, distance, and location. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): God has no place: if He were located somewhere, He could not be near to everyone who addresses Him."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p5", "position": "God is absolutely nearer than creatures to themselves through His ownership and causation.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The Creator causes possible essences to exist, so He is a mediator between each essence and its existence and is nearer to it than it is to itself. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Against the claim that an essence cannot be made itself, Razi argues that the same reasoning would make existence and predication uncaused, absurdly implying that nothing is caused; thus everything is caused by an agent. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God is the source of every necessity: possible existence derives from Necessary Existence, as do universal matters and possible essences; without God there is neither existence nor logic. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): One condition of prayer is humility and reverent concentration; God is nearer than the jugular vein and closer to people than they are to themselves. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (İmam Fahreddin Râzî): Razi argues that a possible thing receives existence only through its Maker, who stands between its essence and existence and is nearer to that essence than its existence is. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (İmam Fahreddin Râzî): Razi's higher argument says God causes not only possible essences to exist but each quiddity to be what it is, making Him nearer to every essence than it is to itself. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī reads divine nearness as absolute: true divine ownership makes humans His servants and brings Him nearer than anything; the cited verses also describe this nearness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God creates and sustains each being and every relation it has, standing between it and itself and between it and all that accompanies it; therefore he is absolutely nearer than anything. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (author): The expression is compared with the statement that God is nearer to a person than the jugular vein. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): When Muslims say God is everywhere, Razi explains that they mean His governance, preservation, and guardianship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): More deeply, the Creator causes each essence to be what it is—substance, blackness, intellect, or soul—so He is nearer to each essence than it is to itself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): He cites the Qurʾānic statement that God is nearer than the jugular and a Prophetic report describing Him as between people and their mounts’ necks."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p6", "position": "The ordinary root denotes proximity in distance, with other figurative uses.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (author): Qurb ordinarily means nearness in distance, the opposite of remoteness; qurban can be an offering to God or a king's close associates. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Qarīb is an intensive form from the root for nearness: one who seeks God through reason finds and knows Him; revelation gives further recognition and relieves hardship. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-Qarīb, “the Near,” is a Divine Name."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p7", "position": "God is specially near friends, the obedient, or believers through favor.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): A further explanation is that God is near to His friends through favor and beneficence."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p8", "position": "Divine nearness is spiritual intimacy or manifestation.", "reasons": "SULAMI (author): Sahl calls modesty before God the lowest station of spiritual nearness. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): They answer God's call by purifying readiness through asceticism and worship; God manifests in purified heart-mirrors to guide them to steadiness."}, {"id": "2:186/q05/p9", "position": "God is in heaven upon the Throne, according to a reported answer.", "reasons": "DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أنس): Anas reports that a Bedouin asked where God was; the Prophet answered that He was in heaven upon His Throne, recited 20:5, and the verse was revealed. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): In Anas’s report, the Prophet answers the question about God’s whereabouts by saying He is in heaven upon the Throne, citing the Throne verse."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q06", "question": "How should God's nearness affect the manner of prayer?", "turns_on": "The sources give different analyses, reports, or applications of this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q06/p1", "position": "One may pray quietly because God hears without loudness.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (الحسن البصري): Hasan al-Basri says the verse followed the question whether God is near for private conversation or far so people must call aloud. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says some Companions asked whether their Lord was near so they could speak privately to Him or far so they should call aloud, and the verse was revealed. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says some Companions asked whether their Lord was near, so they should speak privately, or far, so they should call aloud. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أبو موسى الأشعري): During the expedition toward Khaybar, Abū Mūsā says people loudly called takbīr from a valley; the Prophet told them to moderate, since they call One who hears and is near, not deaf or absent, and He is with them. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (أعرابي): A Bedouin asked the Prophet whether their Lord was near, so they should speak quietly, or far, so they should call aloud; the verse was revealed. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (الحسن بن أبي الحسن): Al-Hasan says people asked whether their Lord was near, so they could speak privately, or distant, so they should call aloud. TABRISI, d. 548 (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says a questioner asked the Prophet whether their Lord was near, so they could whisper to Him, or distant, so they should call aloud; the verse was revealed in response. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (جد الصلت بن حكيم): A Bedouin asked the Prophet whether God was near, so they could whisper to Him, or far, so they should call aloud; the report comes through al-Salt ibn Hakim, his father, and grandfather. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أعرابي): A Bedouin asked the Prophet whether their Lord was near so they could speak privately or far so they should call aloud, and the verse was revealed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي عليه السلام): During an expedition, when companions raised their voices in remembrance and supplication, the Prophet said they were calling One who hears and is near, not a deaf or absent being. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): An attribute-focused question might ask whether God hears prayer, which names may be used, or whether prayer may be offered in any manner; Razi cites the instruction about moderate prayer volume. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن): Al-Hasan says people asked whether their Lord was near, so they could whisper, or far, so they must call loudly; the verse was revealed. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (أعرابي): A Bedouin asked the Prophet whether God was near so they should speak privately to Him, or far so they should call aloud; the verse was revealed in response. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (أعرابي): An Arab asked whether their Lord was near so they could speak privately or far so they should call aloud; the verse was revealed in response. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أعرابي): Ibn Abī Ḥātim reports that a Bedouin asked whether the Lord was near, so they could whisper, or d
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
