<<chunk 79, part 1 of 0..4>>
 God manifests in purified heart-mirrors to guide them to steadiness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): An answer may stand for hearing because response follows hearing; the true response delivers what the supplicant requested, and أجاب and استجاب are synonymous. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مؤولون): Another interpretation takes response to mean hearing: “I hear.” IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عبد الله بن عمرو): ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAmr reports the Prophet’s analogy of hearts as vessels, some more receptive than others, and urges people to ask with certainty: God does not answer a servant who calls with a heedless heart. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): An answer normally matches its question, but may redirect the hearer to the important issue, be broader to meet an overlooked need, or be narrower as circumstances require; al-Sakkākī calls redirection أسلوب الحكيم. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The servants’ response should be wholehearted obedience to God’s commands; they should also believe Him and affirm what He has taught about fasting’s virtues, so that they may attain right guidance and their aims. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Since people hear and answer one another's hopes and requests, they must believe that God, nearer to them than they are to themselves, hears their prayers even sooner. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): ʿAlī’s phrase “the gift is according to intention” means the response matches what the heart truly intends, not necessarily the wording that the tongue displays. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Al-Ṣādiq says God does not answer a prayer made with an inattentive heart."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p3", "position": "Prayer as worship is answered by acceptance and promised reward.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. THALABI, d. 427 (بعضهم): One interpretation takes الدعاء as obedience and God's answering as granting its reward when the person obeys Him. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): One view says response is obligatory when conditions are complete because supplication is worship whose reward is an answer. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses answering a caller's prayer as accepting the worship of one who worships and affirms God's unity. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Answering can mean acceptance when prayer means worship: invocations of God's oneness and praise are worship, and acceptance is called response to match the wording. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Supplication is worship when it fulfills its conditions. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): To explain why many prayers seem unanswered despite this promise, one view takes supplication here as obedience and response as reward. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer brings nearness when the caller becomes absorbed in knowledge of the One and turns from all else; attention to personal aims obstructs nearness, making supplication the best worship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي عليه السلام): A saying attributed to the Prophet calls supplication the marrow of worship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النعمان بن بشير): Al-Nuʿman ibn Bashir reports the Prophet's saying that supplication is worship; Razi explains it as the greatest or best part, like pilgrimage being identified with standing at Arafat as its chief pillar. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet is cited as saying that supplication is worship, supporting the interpretation of الدعاء as worship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If supplication means worship, God’s answer is fulfillment of the reward promised to the obedient; verses 40:60 and 42:26 support this reading. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): If people ask about the One they worship, tell them He is near, rewards obedience, answers the supplicant, and knows a servant's fasting, prayer, and other deeds. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Here supplication means worship and God's answering means acceptance of the worship. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النعمان بن بشير): Abu Dawud transmits from al-Nu'man ibn Bashir the Prophet's statement that supplication is worship, followed by the command to call on God. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): God commands and encourages supplication, names it worship, and promises to answer. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The prayer passage follows the commands to fast, observe the count, magnify God, and give thanks, reminding worshippers that God knows, hears, answers, and recompenses them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مؤولون): A fourth reading equates supplication with worship and response with fulfillment of the promised reward; it cites the verse’s pairing of “call upon Me” with “worship.” ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Created beings, not God, are subject to decree; prayer acknowledges divine precedence and is therefore a high form of worship. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): A prophetic hadith calls supplication the marrow of worship, supporting the author’s view that it is a means of nearness and among the best acts of worship. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Those who belittle supplication also belittle worship, fail to know God as near and responsive, and instead value the attention of creatures or take them as rivals. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The verse rebuts naturalists who imagine the Creator as a blind, deaf force and therefore deem prayer and worship useless. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): In 40:60, “My worship” means calling upon God: the verse invites prayer and promises a response while explicitly naming prayer as worship. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The threat of Hell for abandoning prayer concerns abandoning worship altogether, not merely one branch of worship; this shows that prayer is the root of worship. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): The Prophet urges turning to God in needs and distress, calls prayer the marrow of worship, and says its answer may be immediate, deferred to the afterlife, or take the form of expiation, unless the request is sinful. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Prayer is one form of worship; the closest, warmest relation with God is formed in prostration and in sincere supplication."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p4", "position": "Answering is distinct from granting the exact request.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): The opposing view says answering is not obligatory: supplication is a request, so granting it is a favor. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): One general reading takes “I answer” to mean “I hear”; the verse promises an answer to the call, not necessarily the requested object, just as a master can answer a servant without granting the request. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): God answers supplication in a manner consistent with wisdom: the request must benefit the person's religion and harm neither the supplicant nor another; God grants it when beneficial and delays it when delay is better. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): A master may answer a servant or a parent a child without granting the specific request, so answering and granting are distinct. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): God’s promise to answer prayer is true and unfailing, but answering a prayer differs from granting the requested need. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): A divine answer to prayer is certain, but answering the call differs from granting the requested thing: God says ‘At your service’; fulfillment may come now, later, in the Hereafter, or as something better. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi reports Abu Raja on supplication and obedience and cites poetry for istijaba and giving as an answer. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi reports Abu Raja on supplication and obedience and cites poetry for istijaba and giving as an answer. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi reports Abu Raja on supplication and obedience and cites poetry for istijaba and giving as an answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أهل المعنى): The servant’s response to God is obedience, while God’s response to a servant is granting the requested thing; each responds in a fitting way. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مؤولون): A fifth interpretation says response may mean either granting or withholding what was requested, with God choosing what is better; Abū Ḥayyān says all these interpretations depart from the apparent sense. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): God answers the supplicant's call with a response, fulfills the request with what was sought, and meets desperate need with sufficiency. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Because God’s dominion and encompassing rule cover every possibility, He can answer any creature’s prayer and remove its need through giving and action."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p5", "position": "God may delay the request for the servant's good or to hear the beloved servant.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (أمير المؤمنين): The Commander of the Faithful says an answer may be delayed to increase the supplicant's reward and make the eventual gift more abundant. TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh reports the Prophet saying God may defer a beloved servant's request because He loves hearing the servant's voice, but quickly grant a sincere request from a servant
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
