<<chunk 79, part 2 of 0..4>>
 He dislikes because He hates hearing that voice. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): A supplicant may mistake the requested outcome for what is best; God answers the deeper request for benefit, which may require delay or withholding. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The mountains question is foundational, so God says to answer immediately; delay would leave doubt about an essential doctrine. The answer that mountains will be pulverized follows because each part can be destroyed, hence the whole can. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn Uyayna says knowledge of one's own faults should not deter prayer: God answered Iblis when he asked to be delayed until resurrection. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Answering is God’s ‘At your service, My servant’ when a believer calls; granting the request may be immediate, delayed, in the hereafter, or replaced by what is better. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet names three supplications that are not rejected: those of a just ruler, a fasting person until ifṭār, and an oppressed person. The last rises beneath the clouds, heaven’s gates open for it, and God vows to grant help even if delayed; the report appears in Aḥmad, al-Tirmidhī, al-Nasāʾī, and Ibn Mājah. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report says God may delay the request of a servant He loves to hear the servant's voice, but hasten the request of one He dislikes because He dislikes hearing him. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Elmalılı postpones the remaining details about supplication and returns to the discussion of fasting. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Apparent delay, a better worldly or afterlife substitute, or diversion to what suits the petitioner are still answers matching the real request; a believer may unknowingly ask for what would harm faith and receive what benefits the afterlife. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الله عز وجل): A Torah saying in al-Rāwandī’s Dawʿāt warns that one who prays against an oppressor may himself face the prayers of those he has wronged; God may answer both sides or defer both until Judgment Day."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p6", "position": "God grants the requested object when He wills.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Other explanations limit the general wording: God answers if He wills, if the request accords with the decree, if the answer is good for the petitioner, or if the request is not impossible; the first is compared to 6:41. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (قوم): One interpretation qualifies the promise: God answers if He wills. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Although promises to answer prayer appear unqualified in these verses, Razi says a further verse qualifies them: God removes what is invoked only if He wills, and the general wording is read in light of that qualification. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Every supplicant receives something: the requested outcome when it accords with decree, or otherwise inner calm, an open heart, and patience to bear present hardship; this too is an answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Knowing that divine action accords with decree, knowledge, and wisdom makes an absolute demand incoherent; the request is implicitly conditional on that wisdom. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Some scholars understand the promise as God answering if He wills, as stated in 6:41, so the unrestricted wording is qualified elsewhere. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قيل): Other qualifications make the request accord with divine decree, be good for the petitioner, or be possible; the author notes that not every request is granted as asked. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): The promise to answer prayer, like ادعوني أستجب لكم, is qualified by God’s will, a qualification explained in the following discussion. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The verse promises an answer to the supplicant, while apparent unanswered prayers are qualified by 6:41: by God's will, in accordance with decree, not for an impossible request, or when answering is good for the petitioner."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p7", "position": "God grants when the request serves welfare or wisdom.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): Alternatively, God grants a request only when it accords with welfare; a request contrary to welfare cannot be granted. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): When the conditions hold, God answers if answering benefits the petitioner and delays if delay is more beneficial; human welfare cannot depend on their choice and request. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Supplication is devotional worship; a benefit may be tied to the act of asking and would not be beneficial absent the request. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Supplication remains meaningful even when wisdom determines the outcome: it is worship expressing humility and submission, and a requested event may become beneficial only after the supplication. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another interpretation says God hears an invoker as a nearby person hears them; nearness of distance itself is impossible for God because it belongs to created beings situated in a place. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They argue that all events must ultimately follow from the eternal necessary cause; what it eternally wills is inevitable and what it does not will is impossible, so prayer cannot affect fixed destinies. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They say an absolutely generous God will provide whatever benefits a servant, while requesting what is not beneficial is impermissible. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Something not initially beneficial may become beneficial in light of a prior supplication. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): God's knowledge and decree exceed human understanding; divine wisdom keeps servants between hope and fear, validating religious duties despite God's encompassing knowledge and decree. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Because the secret of decree is unknown before it occurs, divine wisdom requires people to act between hope, which motivates success, and caution, which orders it; human duties remain valid. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Îcâb veya cebir nazariyelerine saplananlar): The objectors argue that a request already known by God to occur must occur necessarily, while one not known to occur is impossible, so prayer is needless either way. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The second fatalist objection says events are fixed by an eternal cause: what it decreed is necessary, what it did not decree impossible, so prayer can neither increase nor decrease destiny. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (اليهود وغيرهم): An objection says the requested need is either already decreed, and therefore necessary, or not decreed, and therefore impossible; either way prayer cannot affect it. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Knowing God means accepting that supplication can bring about customary impossibilities that are not intrinsically impossible; the main prophetic miracles are answered prayers."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p8", "position": "The answer is unrestricted for a true caller, without a further condition.", "reasons": "JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The statement means that God answers whoever calls on Him, although its surface form is categorical. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The unrestricted wording makes turning to God for religious and worldly needs obligatory. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (خالد الربعي): Khalid al-Rab'i marvels that God commands supplication and promises an answer without stating a condition, unlike promises tied to faith and good works or sincere worship. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): Usulists disagree whether applying an unrestricted text to a restricted one follows Arabic usage or analogy; proponents of the linguistic view cite Arabs’ preference for brevity and omission, as in عن اليمين وعن الشمال قعيد. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): When unrestricted and restricted rulings concern the same subject, conflicting specifications—continuous fasting, broken fasting, or days left open—mean the original unrestricted wording remains unrestricted. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The prophetic answer preserves a middle position: neither absolute compulsion nor unrestricted freedom, but a balance of divine determination and human choice, with people facilitated rather than coerced. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God’s unrestricted power and necessary freedom remain intact: the limits described concern the particular act and its conditions, not the agent, just as human ability to give, see, and hear is expressed through organs. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The verse gives both the rule of answered prayer and its cause: people are God's servants, so He is near them, and His nearness grounds His unrestricted response. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The promise applies to a genuine caller whose innate knowledge and desire unite heart and tongue; prayer is what the heart bears and the tongue of natural disposition voices, not words used in jest or falsehood. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The present-tense verb conveys renewed and continuing response; the condition 'when he calls Me' repeats the idea of an invoker and implies that invocation is answered without an added condition, like 40:60. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Alusi sees no need to qualify the promise by God's will, redefine answering as merely “Here I am,” or restrict it to sinless requests or obedient supplicants, though piety helps."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p9", "position": "Prayer as repentance is answered by acceptance of repentance.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
