<<chunk 79, part 3 of 0..4>>
's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. MUQATIL (author): Muqatil's account links the verse to the first fasting rule, Umar's intercourse after night prayer, Sarma's sleep before food, repentance, and God's nearness and call to obedience. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Supplication can mean repentance, since a repentant person calls upon God; its answer then means acceptance of repentance. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مؤولون): A third reading makes supplication repentance and response acceptance of repentance."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p10", "position": "The verse makes no universal promise for every person and time.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Answering a supplicant is God's favor, but this statement does not promise an answer to every person at every time; the conditional concerns being asked about God, not a universal guarantee tied to each invocation."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q09", "question": "What is meant by 'the caller's prayer'?", "turns_on": "The sources give different analyses, reports, or applications of this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q09/p1", "position": "It includes praise and affirmation of divine oneness.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses answering a caller's prayer as accepting the worship of one who worships and affirms God's unity. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Answering can mean acceptance when prayer means worship: invocations of God's oneness and praise are worship, and acceptance is called response to match the wording. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن الأعرابي): The expressions God hears whoever praises Him and the poem about fearing God does not hear me use hearing to mean answering, since hearing and answering follow one another. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The Messenger explains tawḥīd as he explains legal rules, and people ask him about both. JISHUMI, d. 494 (أبو علي): Abu Ali says the verse praises believers and implies that God answers believers' prayers rather than sinners; Abu Bakr al-Ikhshid allows answering an unbeliever's prayer as a gracious favor. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): Calling someone whose prayers are answered praises sound judgment and avoidance of transgression; God enables prayer for what is possible. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet prayed that his community would not fight among themselves, but that prayer was denied because destiny had decreed otherwise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The order places praise before supplication, as Abraham first praised God and then prayed; Razi compares this sequence with Abraham's words. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): One possible sense of supplication is affirming God’s oneness and praising Him; calling its acceptance an answer matches the wording. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī takes أجيب to mean “I hear”; hearing and answering are closely linked, as in “God hears whoever praises Him.” QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Ubada ibn al-Samit says this community, like the prophets, was promised an answer to prayer; it also contrasts their roles concerning hardship and witness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): After commanding glorification and gratitude for guidance, God says He sees those who remember and thank Him, hears their calls, and answers their prayers or requests; invocation should begin with praise. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer as a praiseworthy description to believers who have not mixed faith with wrongdoing; a sinner may get what he asked for without that being called an answer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مؤولون): One interpretation makes supplication the profession of divine unity and praise, and response God’s acceptance of that confession. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says no community asked less than Muhammad's community, which asked about fourteen matters; the moon question was the second answered in Sūrat al-Baqara. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (جابر بن عبد الله): Ibn Mardawayh reports through Ibn ʿAbbās from Jābir that the Prophet recited the verse and made a long talbiya affirming God’s oneness, the truth of the promise and meeting, Paradise, Hell, the Hour, and resurrection. BURHAN, d. 794 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says no community asked fewer questions than Muḥammad’s community: its fourteen questions received answers, including this question and the listed questions in al-Baqara and other sūras. NASHR, d. 833 (جماعات من الفقهاء والقراء والمتكلمين): One scholarly camp holds that the ʿUthmānic codices contain all seven aḥruf, arguing that the community could not neglect any revealed letter and that the Companions agreed on the codices. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Biqai cites the Prophet’s duty of communication to frame his recitation as conveying God’s own message directly to the community. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says the Prophet recites God's words so the community hears its Lord directly; the Prophet connects servants to God rather than standing as a barrier between them. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (إبراهيم التيمي): A saying transmitted by Ibrahim al-Taymi holds that one who praises God before supplicating has secured a response, while one who supplicates first remains hopeful. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس عن جابر بن عبد الله): Ibn ʿAbbas transmits Jābir’s report that the Prophet recited the verse and then prayed with the talbiya, affirmations of God’s oneness, the afterlife, Paradise, Hell, the Hour, and resurrection. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Because praise to the Generous also contains supplication, a hadith calls praise of God the best supplication. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Asked why “Call Me and I will answer” seemed unfulfilled, al-Ṣādiq says to obey God and follow the proper form: praise and glorify Him, recall and thank His blessings, bless Muḥammad and his family, confess sins, and seek forgiveness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A Prophetic report transmitted by both schools calls the Qadariyya the Magians of this community."}, {"id": "2:186/q09/p2", "position": "It is calling upon God to request care, aid, or a specific need.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): God answers supplication in a manner consistent with wisdom: the request must benefit the person's religion and harm neither the supplicant nor another; God grants it when beneficial and delays it when delay is better. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): A supplicant may mistake the requested outcome for what is best; God answers the deeper request for benefit, which may require delay or withholding. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو سليمان الخطابي): Al-Khattabi derives duʿāʾ as the verbal noun of calling, used as a noun like 'sound'; its reality is a servant's seeking divine care and aid. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Duʿāʾ is originally a verbal noun meaning calling, like daʿwat; conventionally it means a subordinate's request or entreaty to a superior and is also used as a noun. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The reality of prayer is the servant's seeking help, care, and assistance from the Lord. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The reported etiquettes of prayer help bring a servant closer to the true reality of prayer and petition. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Apparent delay, a better worldly or afterlife substitute, or diversion to what suits the petitioner are still answers matching the real request; a believer may unknowingly ask for what would harm faith and receive what benefits the afterlife. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Heedlessness and distraction prevent the reality of prayer and petition from taking place. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Du'a directs the attention of the invoked toward the caller; asking seeks a benefit from the one asked to relieve a need and is the intended outcome of du'a. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The shared idea in asking includes seeking relief from ignorance, asking for an account, and requesting provision or other benefits. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): A second cited hadith says a supplicant receives one of three outcomes: the request now, its postponement for their benefit, or expiation of a sin. STUDYQURAN (author): Duʿāʾ can mean prayer as calling on God to receive something or request a specific blessing; it does not cover every sense of English “prayer.” STUDYQURAN (author): Duʿāʾ, rendered “call,” can mean individual prayer, supplication, or summons, depending on context."}, {"id": "2:186/q09/p3", "position": "It includes worship and obedient action.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): One view says response is obligatory when conditions are complete because supplication is worship whose reward is an answer. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Supplication is worship when it fulfills its conditions. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النعمان بن بشير): Al-Nuʿman ibn Bashir reports the Prophet's saying that supplication is worship; Razi explains it as the greatest or best part, like pilgrimage being identified with standing at
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
