<<chunk 79, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:186/q08", "question": "What does 'I answer' promise?", "turns_on": "The dispute turns on whether answer means fulfillment, hearing, or acceptance, and whether will, wisdom, genuine invocation, or proper conduct limits the promise.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q08/p1", "position": "Every genuine lawful prayer receives an answer, often as a present grant, afterlife reserve, or harm averted.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. THALABI, d. 427 (بعضهم): Some restrict the general promise: prayers are answered only if God wills, accord with decree, avoid impossibility, or are beneficial; Abu Sa'id's report says a sinless, non-severing prayer receives one of three outcomes. THALABI, d. 427 (أبو سعيد): The Prophet says a Muslim's prayer without sin or severing kinship brings an immediate answer, an afterlife reserve, or protection from equivalent harm. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (السدي): Al-Suddi says every believer's prayer is answered: it may be granted immediately, stored for the afterlife, or used to avert harm. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (قوم): Another view says each supplication receives one of three outcomes: a worldly answer, expiation, or reward stored for the afterlife. TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī reports the Prophet saying that a Muslim's prayer without sin or severing kinship receives one of three outcomes: prompt fulfillment, a reward saved for the afterlife, or equivalent harm averted. The Companions ask if they should pray more, and he answers that God is more generous. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (النبي): The Prophet says a Muslim's lawful supplication is answered in one of three ways: granted promptly, stored for the afterlife, or matched by an equivalent harm averted; Abu Saʿid transmits the report. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): On the first reading, saying that no answer came denies all three outcomes and empties the supplication of each. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قوم): One view says every prayer is answered in one of three ways: granted now, stored for the afterlife, or offset by equivalent protection from harm. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Sa'id al-Khudri reports that a Muslim who asks without sin or severing kin receives one of three outcomes; when asked if they should ask more, the Prophet replied that God is more generous. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو عمر): Abu Umar presents the report as a connected exegesis of God's promise to answer in 40:60, with all three outcomes counting as response. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو سعيد): Abū Saʿīd reports the Prophet’s teaching that a sinless, non-severing supplication receives one of three outcomes: immediate grant, deferred reward, or equivalent protection from harm. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أبو سعيد): Abū Saʿīd reports that a Muslim’s lawful prayer, without a break of kinship, receives one of three outcomes: swift fulfillment, preservation for the afterlife, or an equivalent harm averted; the Prophet says God gives abundantly. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): Apparent nonresponse is qualified by the verse saying God uncovers what people call for if He wills; the Prophet explains that a sinless, non-estranging supplication is answered immediately, saved for the afterlife, or matched by averting harm. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (عليه السلام): A report says a Muslim's prayer is not rejected except when it asks for sin or severing kinship; otherwise its good may be stored for the Hereafter or evil averted in proportion to the prayer. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو سعيد): In a sound report from Abu Sa'id, the Prophet says a Muslim's lawful supplication brings one of three outcomes: immediate answer, deferred reward, or protection from equivalent harm. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): A second cited hadith says a supplicant receives one of three outcomes: the request now, its postponement for their benefit, or expiation of a sin. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Another explanation says God never frustrates a prayer: He grants the requested matter if decreed, otherwise stores its reward for the Hereafter or averts harm; a report from ʿUbāda supports this. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (علماؤنا): Scholars offer two readings of the answer promise: a necessary outcome among the three already mentioned, or the possibility of the specific request being granted. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عبادة بن الصامت): ʿUbāda ibn al-Ṣāmit reports that a Muslim’s prayer is answered or an equivalent harm is kept away, provided it involves neither sin nor breaking family ties. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The warning “they forgot God, so He forgot them” in 9:67 supports the point; this does not contradict reports that prayer is not rejected in complete severance, since ordinary hardship is not total severance. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): God promises to answer a caller whenever, however, and wherever the caller invokes Him, without requiring a prior claim of ascetic merit or a particular worship-time. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): The promise of answering is clear in meaning. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A second proof of prayer's excellence is God's command to call upon Him with a promise to answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): God’s promise to answer prayer need not mean an immediate answer; fulfillment even in the afterlife makes the promise true. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The promise to answer does not require every supplicant to receive every specific thing requested. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The promise that God answers a caller confirms His nearness and assures the caller of a response. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The promise to answer supplication further establishes the figurative nearness intended here. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The reciprocal command displays divine generosity: God, though wholly self-sufficient, answers people, so people in every way dependent on Him should answer His call. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The open-ended promises that God answers supplication and suffices His servant reinforce that ordinary causal expectations do not limit what God brings about."}, {"id": "2:186/q08/p2", "position": "Answering can mean hearing the caller.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): One explanation takes 'I answer' to mean 'I hear': hearing is expressed as answering because it precedes an answer. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says ajibu here means I hear: nearness suggests hearing, and response can mean hearing because hearing precedes an answer; not responding may mean not hearing. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): The poem about ruins that do not answer when asked uses answering to mean hearing; denying an answer implies denying that the ruins can hear. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن الأعرابي): The expressions God hears whoever praises Him and the poem about fearing God does not hear me use hearing to mean answering, since hearing and answering follow one another. WAHIDI-WAJIZ, d. 468 (author): God's nearness means nearness by knowledge, and answering a caller means hearing the caller. JISHUMI, d. 494 (قيل): Other explanations say God is near in answering, quick to answer, in hearing, or in knowledge and power. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): One view says God answers the believer promptly but delays granting the request so He may hear the believer's voice, while He hastens the disliked person's request because He dislikes hearing that voice. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The second sense is answering: God's 'I am near' means that He responds, as does 'He is all-hearing, near.' IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Another answer is that supplication requires conditions rooted in obedience, including lawful food and a present heart; unlawful food blocks its answer. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الفراء وابن القاسم): Al-Farra and Ibn al-Qasim explain ujibu as “I hear.” RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): An action-focused question could ask whether God answers after hearing a supplication and fulfills the request. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The answer suits questions about where God is, whether He hears, how loudly to pray, whether He grants requests, and whether He accepts repentance; it is near in each relevant sense. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī takes أجيب to mean “I hear”; hearing and answering are closely linked, as in “God hears whoever praises Him.” RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Response means submission and compliance, while faith is a quality of the heart; the servant attains faith's light and strength only after acts of obedience and worship. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another view says the verse generally tells believers that their Lord answers supplications, hears them, knows their distress, and responds as He wills. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The supplicant needs sincere intent and an attentive heart; God does not answer a heedless, distracted heart. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): They answer God's call by purifying readiness through asceticism and worship;
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
