<<chunk 80, part 2 of 0..5>>
e stated qualities may expect an answer, but others must not despair; the text cites the prohibition on despairing from God’s mercy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون منهم): Some say abandoning sins itself functions as prayer, since God then takes charge of one’s affairs. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أبو هريرة): Abū Hurayra reports that a servant continues to receive an answer so long as he is not impatient, saying, ‘I prayed, but my prayer was not answered.’ The report is in both Ṣaḥīḥs. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أنس): Anas reports the Prophet’s statement that a servant remains in a good state unless he becomes impatient, which means saying that he prayed but God did not answer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha says a believer’s prayer either comes quickly in this life or is stored for the next, unless the person is impatient or despairing; she defines both as saying they asked but received no answer. ʿUrwa narrates her explanation. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (سعيد بن المسيب): Ibn Qusayṭ says he heard Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib teach exactly what ʿĀʾisha taught about a prayer’s fulfillment, unless the supplicant is impatient or despairing. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (علي): Ali reports that after the Prophet urged people not to tire of prayer and cited 40:60, a man asked whether God hears supplication; this verse was revealed. SUYUTI-LUBAB, d. 911 (علي): Ali reports that after the Prophet urged people not to tire of supplication, a man asked whether God hears prayer; the verse was then revealed. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The threat of Hell for abandoning prayer concerns abandoning worship altogether, not merely one branch of worship; this shows that prayer is the root of worship. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Prayer with despair or hesitation shows that the person is not truly asking; the source also reports a prohibition on praying for what cannot be. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): A cited hadith says each person’s prayer is answered unless they grow impatient and complain that it was not answered."}, {"id": "2:186/q10/p6", "position": "A request for the impossible or harmful is not a true eligible prayer.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Other explanations limit the general wording: God answers if He wills, if the request accords with the decree, if the answer is good for the petitioner, or if the request is not impossible; the first is compared to 6:41. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another interpretation says God hears an invoker as a nearby person hears them; nearness of distance itself is impossible for God because it belongs to created beings situated in a place. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If God occupied a place and were perceptible, He would be divisible; dependence on parts would make Him possible and originated, which is impossible for the eternal Creator. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A spatial occupant must be infinite in all directions, infinite in only some, or finite throughout; the first two are impossible and the third is rejected by both sides, so God is not in a direction. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They argue that all events must ultimately follow from the eternal necessary cause; what it eternally wills is inevitable and what it does not will is impossible, so prayer cannot affect fixed destinies. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): The general rule is that an attribute whose literal reality is impossible for God is interpreted through its necessary implication. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The verse promises an answer to the supplicant, while apparent unanswered prayers are qualified by 6:41: by God's will, in accordance with decree, not for an impossible request, or when answering is good for the petitioner. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): God's nearness is metaphorical, since spatial proximity is impossible for Him; it denotes His knowledge of servants' acts and words and awareness of their states. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Îcâb veya cebir nazariyelerine saplananlar): The objectors argue that a request already known by God to occur must occur necessarily, while one not known to occur is impossible, so prayer is needless either way. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The second fatalist objection says events are fixed by an eternal cause: what it decreed is necessary, what it did not decree impossible, so prayer can neither increase nor decrease destiny. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (اليهود وغيرهم): An objection says the requested need is either already decreed, and therefore necessary, or not decreed, and therefore impossible; either way prayer cannot affect it. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Knowing God means accepting that supplication can bring about customary impossibilities that are not intrinsically impossible; the main prophetic miracles are answered prayers. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): One failure is that the person has not truly asked: ignorance may lead someone to request what cannot happen or what they would not want if they knew its reality, as with asking for cure rather than a dead person's return to life. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (علي عليه السلام): ʿAlī corrects a man who sought refuge from “trial”: wealth and children themselves are called a trial in 64:15, so he should seek refuge from misleading trials instead."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q11", "question": "What role does supplication have beside decree and ordinary causes?", "turns_on": "The disagreement turns on whether prayer is a cause within decree or futile before fixed outcomes, and on whether surrender calls for silence.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q11/p1", "position": "Prayer is a real cause within God's decree, while God remains sovereign over effects.", "reasons": "THALABI, d. 427 (بعضهم): Some restrict the general promise: prayers are answered only if God wills, accord with decree, avoid impossibility, or are beneficial; Abu Sa'id's report says a sinless, non-severing prayer receives one of three outcomes. THALABI, d. 427 (إبراهيم بن أدهم): Ibrahim ibn Adham says prayers go unanswered because people know God and the Prophet without obeying or following the Sunna, neglect the Qur'an and gratitude, ignore the afterlife and death, and fixate on others' faults. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Supplication has manners and conditions that cause acceptance; those who fulfill them are eligible for an answer, while those who violate them transgress and do not deserve one. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet prayed that his community would not fight among themselves, but that prayer was denied because destiny had decreed otherwise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي عليه الصلاة والسلام): A saying attributed to the Prophet states that God decreed the measures before creating creation by a specified number of years; opponents cite it to argue that prayer cannot change destiny. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عطاء): Ibn Ata likens supplication to a structure with pillars, wings, causes, and times: when these fit, it gains strength, ascends, and succeeds. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Prayer is a supreme act of servitude because it displays dependence on God; revelation and the prophets command and practice it, refuting those who say it has no benefit. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون ممن يسمون علماء الحقيقة): One group says prayer is appropriate for afterlife matters but unnecessary for worldly needs because God already undertakes them. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Supplication has conditions and courtesies that cause an answer; one who neglects them commits excess and does not merit a response. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The prophetic answer preserves a middle position: neither absolute compulsion nor unrestricted freedom, but a balance of divine determination and human choice, with people facilitated rather than coerced. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The predestination objection is incomplete: some outcomes are decreed conditional on supplication, just as satiety depends on eating and success on seeking and effort. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Created beings, not God, are subject to decree; prayer acknowledges divine precedence and is therefore a high form of worship. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Since events are tied to causes and effort follows laws, supplication is itself one of the causes through which decreed outcomes occur. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The second fatalist objection says events are fixed by an eternal cause: what it decreed is necessary, what it did not decree impossible, so prayer can neither increase nor decrease destiny. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The verse rebukes people who shout and make a commotion in prayer because they imagine God is difficult to hear or far away. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (اليهود وغيرهم): An objection says the requested need is either already decreed, and therefore necessary, or not decreed, and therefore impossible; either way prayer cannot affect it. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Predetermination does not make a thing independent of its causes; prayer itself is one cause, so when it occurs its effect can occur. This is what the reports mean by saying prayer is part of decree. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A Prophetic report says that nothing averts decree except prayer. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (أبو الحسن موسى عليه السلام): Abū al-Ḥasan Mūsā urges prayer because it averts a decreed calamity even when its implementation is all that remains. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Al-Ṣādiq again says prayer averts a firmly decreed outcome and calls it the key to mercy and success in every need; what is with God is attained only by prayer. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The verse gives both the rule of answered prayer and its cause: people are God's servants, so He is near them, and His nearness grounds His unrestricted response. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The prayer passages just cited contain prayer’s pillars and etiquette; their central requirement is sincerity, with heart and tongue aligned, detachment from every cause besides God, and reliance on Him. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The preceding reports call for si
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
