<<chunk 80, part 1 of 0..5>>
: The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer as a praiseworthy description to believers who have not mixed faith with wrongdoing; a sinner may get what he asked for without that being called an answer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أبو هريرة): Muslim reports that prayer continues to be answered unless it asks for sin or severing kinship, or the servant grows impatient; impatience is repeating that one prayed without seeing an answer, then tiring of prayer and abandoning it. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (عليه السلام): A report says a Muslim's prayer is not rejected except when it asks for sin or severing kinship; otherwise its good may be stored for the Hereafter or evil averted in proportion to the prayer. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Among the special conditions is purifying the supplicant, beginning with bodily purification through lawful food; a proverb calls lawful food the teeth of supplication's key to heaven. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): These outcomes apply when supplication stays within bounds; transgression in prayer is forbidden and 7:55 forbids it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (علي): Ali tells Nawf that God instructed David to require pure hearts, humble eyes, and clean hands from worshippers, and said He would not answer anyone while they wronged another creature. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (اسماعيل بن همام عن أبي الحسن عليه السلام): A single private prayer by a servant equals seventy public prayers. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (سلمان وجابر وعبد الله بن عمر وأنس بن مالك وابن أبي مغيث): Al-Durr al-Manthūr cites eight Prophetic reports through several Companions, all of which mention raising hands in prayer."}, {"id": "2:186/q10/p3", "position": "Sincerity, exclusive reliance on God, and a heart aligned with the spoken request are essential.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh reports the Prophet saying God may defer a beloved servant's request because He loves hearing the servant's voice, but quickly grant a sincere request from a servant He dislikes because He hates hearing that voice. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If responding to God means assent of heart and tongue, it is faith, making “respond to Me and believe in Me” seem redundant. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another account gives four conditions: guarding the heart in solitude, tongue among people, eyes from the forbidden, and stomach from unlawful food. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The supplicant needs sincere intent and an attentive heart; God does not answer a heedless, distracted heart. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عطاء): Ibn Ata names the pillars as presence of heart, compassion, resignation, and humility; sincerity is its wings, pre-dawn its time, and blessings on Muhammad its cause. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The command to believe is not a new conversion, since the passage addresses believers; it instead calls for lasting faith, sincerity, or belief in God’s promised answer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (نافع بن معد يكرب): Ibn Mardawayh transmits an unusual report from Nāfiʿ ibn Maʿd Yakrib: he and ʿĀʾisha asked about the verse, and Gabriel conveyed God’s greeting and promise to answer the sincere servant’s call. Ibn Kathīr calls this route gharīb. BURHAN, d. 794 (أبو العباس): The written omission of the object pronoun in دعان signals a prayer arising from the unseen realm with inward sincerity. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Every creature inwardly calls through need even without speech; the explicit clause requires spoken supplication to match the sincerity of that inward state. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (نافع بن معد يكرب): Nafiʿ ibn Maʿd Yakrib reports that ʿAʾisha asked the Prophet about the verse; Gabriel conveyed God’s greeting and promise to answer her sincere, pious prayer. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The sayings attributed to Gabriel and Abraham are, fitting their station, eloquent forms of prayer; silent state can speak more eloquently than words for a sincere person in God’s presence. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Asking and seeking help from God means relying on Him as the true source: ordinary causes have only the limited, God-given role of pathways and intermediaries, so exclusive reliance on them is misplaced. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): This teaching does not abolish created causes: a person asks with the heart, speaks with the tongue, and employs bodily organs, just as giving, seeing, and hearing require a hand, eye, and ear. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): These reports point to persistence: repeatedly pursuing a sincere intention purifies it. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Keeping prayer private protects the sincerity of the request. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The promise applies to a genuine caller whose innate knowledge and desire unite heart and tongue; prayer is what the heart bears and the tongue of natural disposition voices, not words used in jest or falsehood. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): A request made by natural disposition to God does not miss its answer; an apparently unanswered prayer must lack either genuine asking or exclusive reliance on God. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The prayer passages just cited contain prayer’s pillars and etiquette; their central requirement is sincerity, with heart and tongue aligned, detachment from every cause besides God, and reliance on Him. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The preceding reports call for sincerity in prayer; they do not deny created causes, which God appoints as intermediaries rather than independent sources of effect. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Innate desire can oppose a person's words or imagined wishes, like the sick child who rejects bitter medicine while naturally seeking health; the natural order is sound, whereas imagination often errs, so the reports concern the heart’s true request. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): ʿAlī’s phrase “the gift is according to intention” means the response matches what the heart truly intends, not necessarily the wording that the tongue displays. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Prayer is one form of worship; the closest, warmest relation with God is formed in prostration and in sincere supplication. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The supplicant must know that only God can meet the need and that all intermediaries are under His control. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): One who asks revenge for another’s wrongdoing accepts the same standard for every comparable case; if that petitioner has wronged someone, the request applies to him too, while unwillingness to accept that result shows the prayer is not genuine."}, {"id": "2:186/q10/p4", "position": "An attentive heart and sound knowledge of God are needed.", "reasons": "THALABI, d. 427 (إبراهيم بن أدهم): Ibrahim ibn Adham says prayers go unanswered because people know God and the Prophet without obeying or following the Sunna, neglect the Qur'an and gratitude, ignore the afterlife and death, and fixate on others' faults. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Prayer has conditions: the petitioner must know God, know what is proper to ask, and know the proper way to make the request. TABRISI, d. 548 (إبراهيم بن أدهم): Asked why prayers go unanswered, Ibrāhīm ibn Adham says people know God but disobey, know the Prophet but neglect his Sunna, know the Quran but do not act on it, fail to thank blessings or seek Paradise and flee Hell, agree with Satan, neglect preparation for death, fail to learn from the dead, and occupy themselves with others' faults. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A genuine petitioner must know God; otherwise he calls an imagined nonexistent object rather than God. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): God does not disappoint a supplicant or become distracted from the prayer; He hears supplication. The verse encourages prayer, which is never lost with Him. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عبد الله بن عمرو): ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAmr reports the Prophet’s analogy of hearts as vessels, some more receptive than others, and urges people to ask with certainty: God does not answer a servant who calls with a heedless heart. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (معاذ بن جبل عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Muʿadh reports the Prophet saying that with true knowledge of God, mountains would move in response to one’s supplication. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Loud prayer suits the heedless by driving away stray thoughts, while subdued prayer suits people present with God. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Those who belittle supplication also belittle worship, fail to know God as near and responsive, and instead value the attention of creatures or take them as rivals. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): Mu'adh ibn Jabal transmits the Prophet's saying that true knowledge of God would make mountains move through one's supplication. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Heedlessness and distraction prevent the reality of prayer and petition from taking place. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Al-Ṣādiq says God does not answer a prayer made with an inattentive heart. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (علي عليه السلام): ʿAlī says God does not accept a prayer from a heedless heart. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): “Know God in ease and He will know you in hardship” means invoke Him while things are easy; one who forgets God then treats causes as independent and only acknowledges lordship conditionally in distress."}, {"id": "2:186/q10/p5", "position": "One must avoid impatience, despair, and abandoning prayer.", "reasons": "TUSTARI (author): Responding means supplicating and believing means affirming the present God without despair. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): On the second reading, impatience prevents a specific answer because it shows despair, weak certainty, and discontent. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (علماؤنا): Scholars say resolving to ask means striving in supplication and hoping for an answer, without despairing of God's mercy, since one asks the Generous. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A sound report says prayer is answered so long as a person does not become impatient and complain that it has gone unanswered. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): A caller with th
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
