<<chunk 80, part 5 of 0..5>>
: A third interpretation is: let them obey Me. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (عطاء عن ابن عباس): Ata transmits from Ibn Abbas that God's nearness here means being near His friends and people of obedience. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (author): People should answer God when He calls them to faith and obedience, just as He answers when they call on Him for their needs. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (مجاهد وغيره): Mujahid and others understand the command as answering God’s call to faith through obedience and action. TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda explains the imperative as answering God in response to what He has called them to do. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): The author treats jāba, obedience, and capacity as verbal nouns; answering a question is called a response, and clouds clearing is injiāb. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Shaytan derives from distance, whereas the obedient servant is near; the nearness of God and the command to draw near support this contrast. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (جعفر الصادق): Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq says seeking refuge is required before recitation, unlike other acts of obedience, because it cleanses a tongue soiled by lying, backbiting, and gossip. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (مجاهد وغيره): Mujahid and others understand it as answering God's call to faith, obedience, and action. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون): Some restrict the promise to an obedient caller who avoids disobedience. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مجاهد، أبو عبيدة وغيرهما): Mujāhid, Abū ʿUbayda, and others read it as answering God’s call to faith and obedience just as He answers people’s needs; istifʿāl here functions like the basic verb. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (مجاهد والربيع): Mujāhid and al-Rabīʿ gloss it as obeying. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Because God's majesty may suggest the distance of an earthly king, the transition reassures servants that He watches both the obedient and disobedient and is near. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Answering is also conditioned on the servant answering God's call to obedience, as the next clause says. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Answering God’s call yields awareness of His nearness, the ability to think and act rightly, and the granting of one’s supplication."}, {"id": "2:186/q15/p2", "position": "They should supplicate and ask God to answer.", "reasons": "TUSTARI (author): Responding means supplicating and believing means affirming the present God without despair. THALABI, d. 427 (بعضهم): Another view treats the promise as general but guarantees an answer rather than fulfillment of the request; denying this would make God's report false, and reports from Ibn Umar and David support answered prayer. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): Whether an answer to an incompletely conditioned request is permitted is disputed: it is barred by the view requiring an answer when conditions are complete, but allowed by the other view. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): A fourth interpretation is: let them call upon Me. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (أهل المعاني): A servant's answer to God is obedience, and each response matches the request: God's command is for obedience, while asking for charity is answered by giving; skies answer with rain and earth with growth. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): One reading of istijāba is “answer me,” meaning obey me; answering can mean obedience or granting a request, while God's answering is giving and the servant's answering is obedience. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Another reading is “ask Me to answer”; in substance, the instruction is to obey God. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Other explanations limit the general wording: God answers if He wills, if the request accords with the decree, if the answer is good for the petitioner, or if the request is not impossible; the first is compared to 6:41. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): One general reading takes “I answer” to mean “I hear”; the verse promises an answer to the call, not necessarily the requested object, just as a master can answer a servant without granting the request. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (أبو رجاء الخراساني): Abu Raja al-Khurasani understands the command as “let them supplicate to Me.” TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another interpretation takes the command to mean let them supplicate to Me. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): A supplicant may mistake the requested outcome for what is best; God answers the deeper request for benefit, which may require delay or withholding. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A counterreading takes the question to concern God's action—whether He answers and fulfills requests—because the statement about nearness is followed by a promise to answer prayer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Every supplicant receives something: the requested outcome when it accords with decree, or otherwise inner calm, an open heart, and patience to bear present hardship; this too is an answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer to believers free of grave sin: being called answered is a great religious honor, incompatible with a sinner’s deserved disgrace; a sinner’s request may occur without counting as an answer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): A master may answer a servant or a parent a child without granting the specific request, so answering and granting are distinct. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو رجاء الخراساني): Abu Raja al-Khurasani interprets the command as let them pray to Me. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya interprets it as let them request that I answer; this is the usual seeking sense of the form استفعل, apart from exceptional forms such as istaghna Allah. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The root of أجاب is related to cutting or selecting: the respondent apportions to the asker what was requested; rain and vegetation likewise answer sky and earth. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): God’s nearness cannot be spatial; it means He hears invocation and promptly grants the petitioner’s request, figuratively like someone nearby who quickly answers. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أنس): In the supplication verse, responding to God means supplicating to Him, and believing in Him means trusting that He answers. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عطاء الخراساني): ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurāsānī glosses responding as supplicating and says belief means God will answer them. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The verse promises an answer to the supplicant, while apparent unanswered prayers are qualified by 6:41: by God's will, in accordance with decree, not for an impossible request, or when answering is good for the petitioner. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): A request made by natural disposition to God does not miss its answer; an apparently unanswered prayer must lack either genuine asking or exclusive reliance on God."}, {"id": "2:186/q15/p3", "position": "They should pronounce the talbiya.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. FARRA (author): Al-Farra discusses a preceding accusative construction, the polytheists' seven-heavens question, and talbiya as response to God. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قيل): Another view takes response as talbiya, the pilgrim’s formula “labbayk Allāhumma labbayk”; the lām is a command lām and is not reported read with kasra. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (جابر بن عبد الله): Ibn Mardawayh reports through Ibn ʿAbbās from Jābir that the Prophet recited the verse and made a long talbiya affirming God’s oneness, the truth of the promise and meeting, Paradise, Hell, the Hour, and resurrection. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس عن جابر بن عبد الله): Ibn ʿAbbas transmits Jābir’s report that the Prophet recited the verse and then prayed with the talbiya, affirmations of God’s oneness, the afterlife, Paradise, Hell, the Hour, and resurrection."}, {"id": "2:186/q15/p4", "position": "They should seek truth by following God's commands.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (المبرد والسراج): Al-Mubarrad and al-Sarrāj explain it as seeking the truth by conforming to what God commands and forbids."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
