<<chunk 80, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:186/q10", "question": "What makes a person's call genuine and eligible for response?", "turns_on": "The sources give different analyses, reports, or applications of this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q10/p1", "position": "Manners include praise, blessings, humility, good wording, and appropriate time or place.", "reasons": "THALABI, d. 427 (بعضهم): Prayer has manners and conditions that occasion an answer; whoever observes them qualifies for a response. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): One view says response is obligatory when conditions are complete because supplication is worship whose reward is an answer. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): When the supplicant falls short of the conditions, an answer is not obligatory. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): Whether an answer to an incompletely conditioned request is permitted is disputed: it is barred by the view requiring an answer when conditions are complete, but allowed by the other view. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author): For a request aligned with welfare, the supplicant may either fulfill or fall short of the conditions for asking. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Supplication is worship when it fulfills its conditions. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): When the conditions hold, God answers if answering benefits the petitioner and delays if delay is more beneficial; human welfare cannot depend on their choice and request. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): Supplication has manners and conditions that cause acceptance; those who fulfill them are eligible for an answer, while those who violate them transgress and do not deserve one. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The order places praise before supplication, as Abraham first praised God and then prayed; Razi compares this sequence with Abraham's words. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They claim prayer resembles giving orders or prohibitions, which they regard as bad manners toward a generous, merciful Lord. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Some say supplication must be free of grammatical solecism, as a poem says a lion who calls his Lord with solecism gets no answer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The hadith's question expresses how unlikely acceptance is for someone in that condition; answering requires conditions in the supplicant, prayer, and requested thing. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Likely times and circumstances for answered supplication include pre-dawn, breaking the fast, between call and commencement of prayer, Wednesday afternoon, distress, travel, illness, rain, and battle ranks. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Supplication should use transmitted wording, avoid contrived pre-Islamic rhyming prose, and be grammatically correct. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): He lists hoped-for times and places for answered prayer, including dawn, the last third of night, breaking the fast, between calls, distress, rain, battle, Eid, the Friday hour, the Kaʿba, the Prophet’s chamber, and al-Aqṣā. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (إبراهيم التيمي): A saying transmitted by Ibrahim al-Taymi holds that one who praises God before supplicating has secured a response, while one who supplicates first remains hopeful. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Supplication has conditions and courtesies that cause an answer; one who neglects them commits excess and does not merit a response. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Some deny that any prophet's grave is certainly located, apart from the Prophet's; Abraham's is said to be within the enclosure but not precisely identified, while prayers near righteous graves are reported as tested under known conditions. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Al-Fatiha had already been described as the Sura of Supplication and Teaching the Request, and as instruction in the etiquette of prayer. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Supplication and command are requests in the same grammatical form: a needy person’s cry for help is a prayer, while the helper’s “get up” is a response and command. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The greater’s aid to the distressed is a mark of greatness; obedience to the greater is also required by good manners, reason, and the subjects’ own benefit, and rational action is called rushd. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God’s unrestricted power and necessary freedom remain intact: the limits described concern the particular act and its conditions, not the agent, just as human ability to give, see, and hear is expressed through organs. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): A particular act of creating Zayd depends on parents, time, place, conditions, and absence of obstacles; it is the effect, not the divine agent, that depends on these causes. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The reported etiquettes of prayer help bring a servant closer to the true reality of prayer and petition. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Asked why “Call Me and I will answer” seemed unfulfilled, al-Ṣādiq says to obey God and follow the proper form: praise and glorify Him, recall and thank His blessings, bless Muḥammad and his family, confess sins, and seek forgiveness. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The author concludes that God will answer a servant who supplicates with proper etiquette. QIRAAT-ER (Y-iḍ): A fatḥa on the yāʾ is grammatically valid alongside bī and adds phonetic weight to the divine self-reference. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Though both genders are grammatically possible, the verse chooses masculine قريب; the author explains that an إضافة can take gender from its complement when it is part-like or nearly so. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): When events occur in accordance with a supplicant's aim, this indicates a world-governing agent who hears prayer; otherwise the desired result would not occur at that time. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (جابر بن عبد الله): Jabir says the Prophet prayed three times at the Conquest Mosque on Monday and Tuesday and was answered on Wednesday between prayers; Jabir sought that hour for grave troubles and recognized the answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي عليه السلام): The Prophet instructs a supplicant to ask firmly for forgiveness rather than say 'if You will,' since no one can compel God. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (علماؤنا): Scholars say a supplicant should not qualify requests for forgiveness, mercy, or gifts with if You wish; he should ask decisively as someone in need. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Adding if You wish suggests indifference to God's mercy or gift, like asking someone whose help one does not need; the needy should be resolute. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Anas reports the Prophet's instruction to make one's request resolutely and not say grant it if You wish, since no one can compel God. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The Muwatta also quotes the wording, O God forgive me if You wish and have mercy on me if You wish."}, {"id": "2:186/q10/p2", "position": "Lawful food, obedience, and avoidance of sin or severing kinship matter.", "reasons": "THALABI, d. 427 (أبو سعيد): The Prophet says a Muslim's prayer without sin or severing kinship brings an immediate answer, an afterlife reserve, or protection from equivalent harm. JISHUMI, d. 494 (أبو علي): Abu Ali says the verse praises believers and implies that God answers believers' prayers rather than sinners; Abu Bakr al-Ikhshid allows answering an unbeliever's prayer as a gracious favor. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (عبادة بن الصامت): The Prophet says no Muslim prays without receiving what he asked or having equivalent harm averted, unless he asks for sin or severing kinship. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أبو هريرة): The Prophet says God answers so long as a person does not pray for sin or severing kinship and does not become impatient; impatience is repeating the plea, seeing no answer, despairing, and abandoning prayer. TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī reports the Prophet saying that a Muslim's prayer without sin or severing kinship receives one of three outcomes: prompt fulfillment, a reward saved for the afterlife, or equivalent harm averted. The Companions ask if they should pray more, and he answers that God is more generous. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Another answer is that supplication requires conditions rooted in obedience, including lawful food and a present heart; unlawful food blocks its answer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو سعيد الخدري): Al-Qaffal transmits from Abu Saʿid al-Khudri a Prophetic report that a Muslim's prayer is answered by quick fulfillment, a store for the afterlife, or an equivalent evil averted, unless it asks for sin or severing kinship; Razi gives no grading. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer to believers free of grave sin: being called answered is a great religious honor, incompatible with a sinner’s deserved disgrace; a sinner’s request may occur without counting as an answer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): God says He does not love transgressors; al-Qurtubi counts anyone persisting in a major sin, knowingly or unknowingly, among them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Unlawful food and its like also prevent a supplication from being answered. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Sa'id al-Khudri reports that a Muslim who asks without sin or severing kin receives one of three outcomes; when asked if they should ask more, the Prophet replied that God is more generous. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Muslim's report from Abu Hurayra adds that prayer continues to be answered unless the supplicant asks for sin or severing kin, or becomes impatient and gives up. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Other conditions on the supplicant are avoiding unlawful food and not tiring of supplication. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The requested matter must be legally permissible to ask for and do; the cited report excludes sin and severing kinship, which includes Muslims' rights and wrongs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سهل بن عبد الله التستري): Sahl al-Tustari lists seven conditions: humility, fear, hope, persistence, reverence, generality, and lawful food. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (المعتزلة)
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
