<<chunk 80, part 3 of 0..5>>
ncerity in prayer; they do not deny created causes, which God appoints as intermediaries rather than independent sources of effect. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Giving, withholding, and supplication all belong to destiny; asking does not oppose destiny but occurs within it. People should understand destiny as what will happen, not as a demand that events be otherwise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي عليه الصلاة والسلام): The Prophet is quoted as saying that the pen has dried concerning what will be, offered as support for the claim that prayer has no effect. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi says the report holds people to both prior decree and action: it does not cancel outward work, whose performance is itself decreed and facilitated during life. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Bazıları): Some object that predestination makes supplication futile: what is decreed will occur, while what is not decreed will not occur. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Elmalılı also cites the saying that the pen has dried concerning what will be. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Elmalılı rejects as ignorant the claim that prayer is useless, especially among advocates of a blind natural force and adherents of necessitarian or compulsion theories. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (اليهود): The Jews hold that after God created things and fixed their decrees, control passed from Him; thus there is no abrogation, badāʾ, or response to prayer. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi calls the first objection contradictory: if prayer's result is already known to occur, refuting prayer is pointless; if it is known not to occur, denial is unnecessary."}, {"id": "2:186/q11/p2", "position": "Created means should be used as dependent pathways to God.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو عبيدة وابن قتيبة والزجاج): Abu Ubayda, Ibn Qutayba, and al-Zajjaj take ujibu as “I answer”; the command falyastajibū therefore means “let them answer Me,” supported by a poem using istajaba for answering. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Asking and seeking help from God means relying on Him as the true source: ordinary causes have only the limited, God-given role of pathways and intermediaries, so exclusive reliance on them is misplaced. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): This teaching does not abolish created causes: a person asks with the heart, speaks with the tongue, and employs bodily organs, just as giving, seeing, and hearing require a hand, eye, and ear. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Even people who deny that ordinary causes act by themselves may assume their mediation is indispensable; al-Tabataba'i says this assumption conflicts with God's complete sovereignty. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Causation and the mediation of causes are real, but neither reason nor revelation confines events to their ordinary causes; only intrinsic impossibilities remain unattainable. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Another failure is a heart attached to ordinary causes or imagined powers as sufficient or effective; despite verbal invocation, the person has not truly and exclusively asked God. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): God orders events in the material world through laws and causes, using intermediaries such as parents for birth, clouds for rain, causes for death, and organs for hearing and sight. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Seeking God without means is like asking for birth without parents or sight without eyes; relying only on means while forgetting God is equally mistaken. Islam calls for using means while turning to God, who controls causes and outcomes."}, {"id": "2:186/q11/p3", "position": "Some hold that leaving prayer better expresses trust or surrender.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عن الله): A divine saying transmitted through the Prophet promises a greater gift to one whom remembrance keeps from asking; opponents use it to favor leaving supplication. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): From these arguments, the opponents conclude that leaving supplication is preferable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون منهم): Another group says to pray when the praying state improves the heart and inner self, but to refrain when silence is better. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون منهم): Some say always to leave prayer as a sign of trust, non-objection, and surrender of choice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قائلون منهم): Some say abandoning sins itself functions as prayer, since God then takes charge of one’s affairs. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Bazıları): Some cite Gabriel’s and Abraham’s surrendering sayings, acceptance of divine decree, and a sacred hadith preferring remembrance to asking to argue that leaving supplication is better."}, {"id": "2:186/q11/p4", "position": "Because outcomes are fixed, prayer cannot affect them.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): Some opponents argue that prayer is useless: if the requested outcome is known to God, it must occur; if not, it cannot occur. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They argue that all events must ultimately follow from the eternal necessary cause; what it eternally wills is inevitable and what it does not will is impossible, so prayer cannot affect fixed destinies. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The verse rebuts naturalists who imagine the Creator as a blind, deaf force and therefore deem prayer and worship useless. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They argue that God's knowledge of hidden things makes asking unnecessary, citing His knowledge of furtive eyes and concealed hearts; they also claim Gabriel's highest devotion came from not asking."}, {"id": "2:186/q11/p5", "position": "Prayer is worshipful humility even when it does not change the requested outcome.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Prayer does not inform God; it displays servitude, humility, brokenness, and total return to Him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If supplication expresses humility and is followed by acceptance of God's decree, it is among the highest stations; this also answers the remaining objections. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Supplication aims to display servitude and return in humility and abasement, not to inform God."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q12", "question": "How are the final yāʾs in al-dāʿi and daʿāni read?", "turns_on": "Transmission differs by reader, route, and whether recitation is connected or paused.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q12/p1", "position": "Some readers retain both yāʾs in continuous reading, while others delete them.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. ZAJJAJ (author): Zajjaj explains yāʾ in daʿāni and three kinds of supplication: praise and oneness, pardon and mercy, worldly provision. JISHUMI, d. 494 (أبو عمرو وقالون عن نافع): Abu Amr and Qalun from Nafiʿ retain the yāʾ in al-dāʿi and daʿāni in connected reading; other readers omit it, either preserving the original or easing pronunciation with kasra indicating the yāʾ. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أهل المدينة غير قالون وأبو عمرو): Medinan readers other than Qālūn, along with Abū ʿAmr, retain the two yāʾs in connected recitation; the others omit them in connected and paused recitation. Yaʿqūb retains all deleted yāʾs in both positions, and readers agree on retaining those written in the script. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (سهل): Sahl and Yaʿqūb retain the yāʾ of daʿānī both in pause and continuation; Abū ʿAmr and Nāfiʿ other than Qālūn do so in continuation, while the rest omit it in both. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The two yāʾs are orthographic extra-letter variants absent from the codex form: readers omit them throughout, retain them in both positions, or retain them in connection but omit them at pause; the set has sixty-two yāʾs. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (أبو عمرو وقالون): Abū ʿAmr and Qālūn retain both yāʾs in connected reading and omit them at pause. BURHAN, d. 794 (أبو العباس): When the omitted yāʾ is a word’s root ending, as in الداع, it signals a petitioner whose heart and ultimate aim are devoted to God in the unseen and afterlife rather than the present world. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو العلاء وأبو محمد): Abū al-ʿAlāʾ and Abū Muḥammad affirm both yāʾs for Qālūn through the ʿUthmānī route from Abū Nashīṭ. QIRAAT-ER (Yz): Some readers pause without the final yāʾ while others restore it in both words; the full form makes God's first person object explicit. QIRAAT-ER (Yz): The ten-reader form retains final yāʾ in both words, making the first-person object Me explicit rather than implied. QIRAAT-ER (Yz): The ten-reader form restores final yāʾ and the explicit first person object suffix Me. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو عمرو وقالون عن نافع): Abu Amr and Qalun from Nafi retain the yāʾ in الداعي and إذا in connected recitation; the other readers omit it, with the first retention for connection and the second for lightening. BURHAN, d. 794 (أبو العباس): Abū al-ʿAbbās distinguishes yāʾs omitted from the written text but retained in recitation from yāʾs omitted in both, then divides the first kind into pronoun and root-letter yāʾ. NASHR, d. 833 (المدنيان وأبو عمرو): The two Medinan readers and Abū ʿAmr open the yāʾ in مني إلا. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Biqai notes readings that omit the two yāʾ letters, retaining only their kasra, and readings that pronounce both fully; he attributes the variation to Arab tribal speech. BINTSHATI-IJAZ, d. 1419 (author): The author rejects explaining Qur’anic deletion of final weak letters as rhyme or avoidance of adjacent sukūns; examples across the Qur’an show the grammar rules need testing against actual usage."}, {"id": "2:186/q12/p2", "position": "The written omission has an inward significance.", "
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
