<<chunk 80, part 4 of 0..5>>
reasons": "BURHAN, d. 794 (أبو العباس): The written omission of the object pronoun in دعان signals a prayer arising from the unseen realm with inward sincerity."}, {"id": "2:186/q12/p3", "position": "Some readers retain them even in pause.", "reasons": "NASHR, d. 833 (أبو عمرو وورش وأبو جعفر ويعقوب): Abū ʿAmr, Warsh, and Abū Jaʿfar affirm the yāʾ in الداع at continuation; Yaʿqūb affirms it both at pause and continuation, while Qālūn differs as noted earlier. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو جعفر وأبو عمرو وورش ويعقوب): Abū Jaʿfar, Abū ʿAmr, and Warsh affirm the yāʾ in دعان at continuation; Yaʿqūb affirms it in both positions, while Qālūn differs as noted earlier."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q13", "question": "What virtue or practical value does supplication have?", "turns_on": "The sources give different analyses, reports, or applications of this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q13/p1", "position": "Prayer opens divine mercy and may bring aid, forgiveness, and protection.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying that whoever is granted openness in supplication has the doors of response opened for him. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (أبو القاسم القشيري): Al-Qushayrī says questions about mountains, orphans, menstruation, and crescents receive an intermediary, but those asking about God have the intermediaries removed. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الحسن): Al-Hasan gives an aphorism: ships are the keys to the seas, roads to the earth, and supplication to heaven. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عمر عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn ʿUmar reports that whoever is granted an opening in supplication is granted the doors of response; al-Tirmidhi’s wording adds that the doors of mercy open and asking for well-being is especially beloved. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A report attributed to the Prophet and transmitted by both schools says that prayer is the believer’s weapon. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (علي عليه السلام): In his testament to al-Ḥusayn, ʿAlī says God placed the keys to His treasures in the servant’s hands by permitting requests, so supplication opens the doors of blessings and mercy. TABRISI, d. 548 (أنس بن مالك): Anas ibn Mālik's version gives the response as God being more generous and better, repeated three times. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (سلمان الفارسي): Salman reports the Prophet’s statement that God is too generous to return a servant’s raised hands empty after the servant asks Him for good. Al-Tirmidhī grades it ḥasan gharīb; some transmitters did not raise it to the Prophet, and other collections transmit it. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The passage cites a saying that when God wills to answer a servant, He opens supplication for him. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying that whoever is granted an opening for supplication is granted the gates of mercy. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A variant of the Ibn Umar report says that an opening for supplication opens the gates of Paradise. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الباقر عليه السلام): Al-Bāqir says God is too generous to return hands raised in prayer empty, and instructs the petitioner to wipe the hands over the head and face, or in another report over face and chest."}, {"id": "2:186/q13/p2", "position": "Supplication is worship and a chief act of servitude.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (النبي): The Prophet calls the person who cannot supplicate the most incapable and the person who withholds greeting the most miserly. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الجمهور الأعظم من العقلاء): The great majority of rational thinkers hold that supplication is among the most important stations of servitude, supported by revelation and reason. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The overwhelming majority of rational people and scholars affirm that supplication is among the most important stations of servitude, supported by many rational and transmitted proofs. STUDYQURAN (The Prophet): The Prophet said that calling upon God is a form of worship."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q14", "question": "Which times, places, and persons are said to have especially answered prayers?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q14/p1", "position": "Certain times and places, including dawn, rain, Friday, and sacred sites, are recommended.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (author): A qarib is a small boat traveling with larger sea ships for quick errands; the word also means a person seeking water at night. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): A devout, humble supplicant is more likely to receive an answer, especially at particular times, places, and in recognized ways."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q15", "question": "What does 'let them respond to Me' require?", "turns_on": "The derived verb is read as obeying God's call, asking God to answer, or the talbiya.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q15/p1", "position": "They should obey God's call, commands, and prohibitions.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. THALABI, d. 427 (author): For God, answering is giving; for a servant, responding to God is obedience. Ajāba and istajāba can both mean answer. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): God’s answer invites the servant’s prayer, and the servant should answer God’s call; divine generosity is not compelled by the servant’s invocation. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The command means that people should yield to God's commands and prohibitions; istajāba and ajāba are synonymous. TABRISI, d. 548 (مجاهد): Mujāhid explains it as responding to God through obedience. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If responding means acts of obedience, faith precedes those acts, so the expected order would be “believe in Me, then respond”; al-Rāzī raises the inversion as a question. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Response means submission and compliance, while faith is a quality of the heart; the servant attains faith's light and strength only after acts of obedience and worship. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Respond to God's summons through faith and obedience as He responds to people's needs; the command to believe requires constancy, with guidance held out as a hope. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): They should respond when God calls them to faith and obedience, just as He answers when they call Him with their needs. QASHANI, d. 736 (author): They answer God's call by purifying readiness through asceticism and worship; God manifests in purified heart-mirrors to guide them to steadiness. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī says istifʿāl suggests extracting compliance from a resistant soul, which resists the demanding journey to God's House. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj glosses responding to God as obeying Him, and explains that istijāba here means obedience. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (مجاهد): Mujahid glosses responding to God as obeying Him. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): People should answer God's call to faith and obedience as He answers their calls in their needs. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (ابن الشيخ): Ibn al-Shaykh distinguishes responding as submission and surrender from faith as a heart-quality; the order implies that obedience and worship precede faith's light and strength. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): “Let them respond to Me” may mean ask Me to answer their prayers, or answer My call to faith and obedience as I answer their needs. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أكثر المفسرين): Most commentators take the command to mean that people should answer God's call to faith and obedience; “believe in Me” then calls for steadfastness in faith. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Since God answers supplication, people should answer His commands; istajāba and ajāba are synonymous, first meaning to come when called and then metaphorically to fulfill a request. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): One reading takes responding as obeying God's commands, with believing separately enjoining continued faith: the first concerns action and the second its persistence. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain response to God as obedience or invocation, with poetry for istijaba. MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (author)
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
