<<chunk 81, part 2 of 0..4>>
 in faith."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q19", "question": "How is the yāʾ in 'bī' read?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q19/p1", "position": "Warsh reads the yāʾ with fatḥa.", "reasons": "NASHR, d. 833 (ورش): Warsh opens the yāʾ in بي لعلهم in al-Baqara and in لي فاعتزلون in al-Dukhān. NASHR, d. 833 (ورش): Warsh opens the yāʾ in وليؤمنوا بي. QIRAAT-ER (Y-iḍ): A fatḥa on the yāʾ is grammatically valid alongside bī and adds phonetic weight to the divine self-reference."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q20", "question": "What does 'that they may be rightly guided' mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q20/p1", "position": "They may attain guidance, truth, and sound interests in religion and worldly life.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abi Hatim reports the near or far question, the three forms of answered prayer, responding by supplication or obedience, and guidance. THALABI, d. 427 (author): The aim is that they be guided. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): The purpose of the command and the servant’s prayer is that the servant arrive at guidance. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): The phrase means that they may hope to attain right guidance. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses the phrase as so that they may be guided. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Rashada and rashida mean to attain right guidance, the opposite of error. WAHIDI-WAJIZ, d. 468 (author): People should answer God through obedience and belief in the messengers, thereby hoping for right guidance. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Rushd is the opposite of error and means attaining good; a rāshid is a soundly guided person. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The verse says God intends guidance for all morally responsible people, refuting the Mujbira doctrine of divine will. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Laʿallahum yarshudūn means 'so that they may be guided,' not that God is uncertain; alternatively it urges them to act in hope of guidance. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (author): The purpose is that they be guided. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): They may find the truth and be guided to it. TABRISI, d. 548 (المبرد والسراج): Al-Mubarrad and al-Sarrāj explain it as seeking the truth by conforming to what God commands and forbids. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Rushd is the opposite of error; the word has two verb forms, and rashīd describes someone soundly guided. The root means attaining good and irshād is guidance toward it. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The fourth sense is what is more correct, as in the seeker hoping to find a path closer to right guidance. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya says yurshadun means “they are guided.” RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): As scriptural evidence, Razi lists questions about the Spirit, mountains, and the Hour, and questions on practical matters including spending, sacred months, wine and gambling, orphans, menstruation, spoils, Dhul-Qarnayn, truth, and inheritance. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Those who respond and believe are guided to the interests of both religion and worldly life; rashīd describes someone sound in both. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Rushd is the opposite of error; the source gives two pronunciations and forms meaning guidance, direction, or the straightest road. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الهروي): Al-Harawi says rushd, rushd, and rashad mean guidance and uprightness, which explains the verse's hope that they will be guided. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Respond to God's summons through faith and obedience as He responds to people's needs; the command to believe requires constancy, with guidance held out as a hope. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Laʿalla expresses hope that they attain right guidance, the opposite of error. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): الرشد is the opposite of error; the verb has two vocalized forms, and related derivatives refer to guidance, a straight route, lawful descent, and destinations. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): After commanding glorification and gratitude for guidance, God says He sees those who remember and thank Him, hears their calls, and answers their prayers or requests; invocation should begin with praise. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Responding to and believing in God gives people hope of guidance toward what benefits their religion and worldly life; the obligation serves their welfare, not God’s interests. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Because the Qurʾān depicts faith as a traversed path, it fittingly closes with guidance, as in the prayer for the straight path. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): After worshippers glorify God, the passage stresses His nearness and response to supplication, asks them to answer His call, continue in faith, and thereby hope for right guidance. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (جابر بن عبد الله): Ibn Mardawayh reports through Ibn ʿAbbās from Jābir that the Prophet recited the verse and made a long talbiya affirming God’s oneness, the truth of the promise and meeting, Paradise, Hell, the Hour, and resurrection. BURHAN, d. 794 (قيل): Some read the ending as an allusion to Laylat al-Qadr: people need guidance to recognize it, and it is among the most hoped-for times for answered prayer. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Omitting “say” hastens recognition and strengthens the status of the messenger, since a quick answer better demonstrates his truthfulness. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The purpose is that people may continue to attain their goals and find the path of truth. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن عبيد): After the verse’s revelation, the people reportedly affirmed that their Lord was truthful and everywhere. ITQAN, d. 911 (قيل): Another view takes the closing phrase as an allusion to Laylat al-Qadr: after mentioning Ramadan, it says they may be guided to recognize the Night. SUYUTI-LUBAB, d. 911 (عطاء بن أبي رباح): Ata ibn Abi Rabah says people wondered when to pray after 40:60 (“Call upon Me; I will answer you”), so 2:186 through “they may be rightly guided” was revealed. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Righteous guidance means reaching sound interests in religion and worldly life; those who respond and believe attain such interests. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet tailored his guidance to people's stations: he told a Bedouin who left his camel loose to tie it and trust God, while some are urged to the birds' trust when not settled in prior decree. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): “Perhaps they will be rightly guided” means guided to the interests of their religion and worldly life; the root sense is attaining good. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The verse establishes that those who believe in God and His rulings and obey them demonstrate sound reason and guidance, enabling them to reach their aims. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The servants’ response should be wholehearted obedience to God’s commands; they should also believe Him and affirm what He has taught about fasting’s virtues, so that they may attain right guidance and their aims. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Even the necessary judgment that a thing is itself ultimately depends on considering God's necessary existence; all truth-assent depends on affirming the Necessary Being. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Responding to God and believing in Him enables people to proceed in right guidance. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (أبو عبد الله عليه السلام): Al-Majma' reports Abu Abd Allah's gloss that guidance means reaching and being guided to the truth. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): When a requested need is fulfilled, the request has in truth reached God through causes; asking a visible cause as if it alone sufficed is an imaginative construction, not innate awareness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Physical worship gives bodily form to inward orientation and transcendent truths; this is necessary to bodily worship, and supplication similarly embodies the heart’s humble request. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Right guidance in relations with people, the world, and God requires knowing God and relating to Him through wo
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
