<<chunk 81, part 1 of 0..4>>
ay have been omitted. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Biqai glosses ijāba as meeting through speech, the first step toward a complete encounter face to face. ZAJJAJ (author): Istajibu means answer, supported by poetry. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الواحدي): Al-Wāḥidī says أجاب and استجاب are synonyms; Kaʿb al-Ghanawī’s verse illustrates استجاب for answering a caller."}, {"id": "2:186/q16/p3", "position": "Istajāba specifically entails acquiescence or accepting a call.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL, d. 450 (ثعلب): Tha'lab says istijaba means seeking to conform to the answer. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Alternatively, responding includes accepting the invitation to faith, and the following command to believe singles out that especially important part of the general response."}, {"id": "2:186/q16/p4", "position": "The root suggests cutting through or resolving a question.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): The root j-w-b means cutting through: one traverses a land or pierces darkness; answering cuts through a question that is suspended between yes and no. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): استجاب, استجاب له, and أجاب are equivalent; the verb's root carries the sense of cutting off a request by delivering what is sought."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q17", "question": "What grammatical force do the two imperative lāms have?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q17/p1", "position": "The lām commands and governs the jussive; it can be silent after fāʾ or wāw.", "reasons": "JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The lām is an imperative and required for third-person commands; with a present addressee it may be omitted or retained, is originally kasra, and may be vowelless after a single letter. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The sīn is extra and the lām is an imperative; it jussives the verb because it makes it future-only, like a conditional particle, or because it only precedes verbs. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The lām in ‘let them believe in Me’ is an imperative particle. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قيل): Another view takes response as talbiya, the pilgrim’s formula “labbayk Allāhumma labbayk”; the lām is a command lām and is not reported read with kasra. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The lām in fa-l-yastajībū is the imperative lām. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): The command lām is kasra when it begins a clause and is silent after wāw or fāʾ, as in this verse’s two commands. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): The jussive lām is a lām of command, marking that the speaker requests an action; it normally governs a verb whose subject is not the addressee."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q18", "question": "What does 'believe in Me' require?", "turns_on": "The phrase may command general faith, continued faith, or trust in the promised answer.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q18/p1", "position": "They should trust that God hears and answers prayer or can grant the request.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari and authorities explain belief, guidance, and the promise to answer through worship, reward, or God's will. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): God is near all through knowledge, power, hearing, and sight, and especially near believers through care, victory, and answered prayer, never by essence or place. QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): Believing in God here means trusting Him, since He answers whoever calls Him. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (السدي): Al-Suddi says every believer's prayer is answered: it may be granted immediately, stored for the afterlife, or used to avert harm. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): Believers must trust God's promise, which is why the command to believe follows the promise to answer. JISHUMI, d. 494 (أبو علي): Abu Ali says the verse praises believers and implies that God answers believers' prayers rather than sinners; Abu Bakr al-Ikhshid allows answering an unbeliever's prayer as a gracious favor. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (أبو رجاء): Abu Raja takes “believe in Me” to mean believing that God answers their supplications. TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو عبد الله): Abū ʿAbd Allāh explains belief as recognizing that God can grant what they request. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer to believers free of grave sin: being called answered is a great religious honor, incompatible with a sinner’s deserved disgrace; a sinner’s request may occur without counting as an answer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another view says the verse generally tells believers that their Lord answers supplications, hears them, knows their distress, and responds as He wills. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazila restrict answered prayer as a praiseworthy description to believers who have not mixed faith with wrongdoing; a sinner may get what he asked for without that being called an answer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The command to believe is not a new conversion, since the passage addresses believers; it instead calls for lasting faith, sincerity, or belief in God’s promised answer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha says a believer’s prayer either comes quickly in this life or is stored for the next, unless the person is impatient or despairing; she defines both as saying they asked but received no answer. ʿUrwa narrates her explanation. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أنس): In the supplication verse, responding to God means supplicating to Him, and believing in Him means trusting that He answers. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عطاء الخراساني): ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurāsānī glosses responding as supplicating and says belief means God will answer them. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The Prophet tailored his guidance to people's stations: he told a Bedouin who left his camel loose to tie it and trust God, while some are urged to the birds' trust when not settled in prior decree. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): When self-interest is removed, surrender expressed in “I entrust my affair to God” appears fully; perception and desire become God-oriented, and divine will brings about what countless causes and centuries could not. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Al-Ṣādiq says one who presents forty believers before praying will be answered. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (الصادق عليه السلام): Al-Ayyashi transmits Ja'far al-Sadiq's gloss that responding and believing mean knowing God can grant what they ask. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (أبو عبد الله عليه السلام): Al-Majma' reports Abu Abd Allah's gloss that belief means being certain God can grant what people ask of Him. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj glosses believing in God here as knowing Him. ITQAN, d. 911 (جابر): A very weak report says that after reciting this verse the Prophet prayed at length, affirming that God commanded supplication and guaranteed its answer. STUDYQURAN (author): Believers are told to call humbly and secretly at 7:55, and 42:26 says God responds to believers who do righteous deeds."}, {"id": "2:186/q18/p2", "position": "They should affirm God and all He revealed.", "reasons": "TUSTARI (author): Responding means supplicating and believing means affirming the present God without despair. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): They must affirm everything God revealed. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (غيره): Another interpretation treats the phrase as a call to faith generally. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Belief here means affirming everything God revealed. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The servants’ response should be wholehearted obedience to God’s commands; they should also believe Him and affirm what He has taught about fasting’s virtues, so that they may attain right guidance and their aims."}, {"id": "2:186/q18/p3", "position": "Faith is singled out as the chief part of responding to God.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): If responding means acts of obedience, faith precedes those acts, so the expected order would be “believe in Me, then respond”; al-Rāzī raises the inversion as a question. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): After commanding response to every divine call, Biqai presents faith as the first and foremost level, addressing believers and others; faith itself has indefinitely many degrees of strength. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): One reading takes responding as obeying God's commands, with believing separately enjoining continued faith: the first concerns action and the second its persistence. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Alternatively, responding includes accepting the invitation to faith, and the following command to believe singles out that especially important part of the general response."}, {"id": "2:186/q18/p4", "position": "Those already believing should remain steadfast and strengthen faith.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Respond to God's summons through faith and obedience as He responds to people's needs; the command to believe requires constancy, with guidance held out as a hope. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أكثر المفسرين): Most commentators take the command to mean that people should answer God's call to faith and obedience; “believe in Me” then calls for steadfastness in faith. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The command to believe is not redundant with responding to God: it commands persistence and constancy
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
