<<chunk 82, part 2 of 0..5>>
 Arabic and can reflect scope or duration."}]}
{"id": "2:186/q26", "question": "What other theological or spiritual reflections occur in the cited passages?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q26/p1", "position": "The sources extend the verse into reflections on God, servitude, causation, and spiritual life.", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (author): These servants differ from those asking Muhammad about mountains, orphans, menstruation, the Spirit, wine and gambling, or fighting in the sacred month. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (سهل بن عبد الله): Sahl b. ʿAbd Allāh says even a thousand understandings for every Qurʾānic letter cannot exhaust a verse's meanings, since God's speech has no end and each person understands as God opens the heart. JISHUMI, d. 494 (author): The verse denies that God occupies a place or direction, since that would make Him not near to every petitioner, refuting anthropomorphists. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet said that God is between people and the necks of their riding animals. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Rajim means pelted by the arrows of curse and misery, while the servant is joined to felicity by God's word of piety. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The contrast is framed as an invitation to leave the accursed Satan and reach the All-Merciful, the Compassionate. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Satan is an unseen enemy while God is the victorious beloved; when the hidden enemy attacks, the servant should turn to the victorious beloved. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Razi raises why the command says “I seek refuge in God,” which lacks exclusivity, rather than “By God I seek refuge,” though the latter is stronger; he compares الحمد لله and لله الحمد. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعض الجهال): They argue that the highest station is contentment with God's decree and that supplication conflicts with it by preferring one's own wish and seeking personal advantage. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A third proof is that God censures people whose hearts hardened and who did not humble themselves when affliction came, indicating the importance of turning to Him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A fourth proof is the commands to call on God humbly and privately and the statement that people would mean nothing to God without their supplication; denying prayer denies the Qur'an. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الصحابة): The companions asked whether deeds were already decreed or newly determined; the Prophet replied that they were decreed, then told them to act because each person is eased toward what he was created for. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Some form of answer necessarily occurs when prayer is made, since these are un-abrogated declarative statements and otherwise God would be a liar. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Earlier communities turned to their prophets to ask God for their needs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The contrast is with calling on beings besides God who cannot respond. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الله تعالى): A revelation to David says God has bound Himself to answer anyone who calls, but if He answers wrongdoers, He curses them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The phrase in 40:60 about those too proud of worship refers to those too proud to supplicate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The second-person address is to the Prophet although he is not named in the wording, since the preceding account presupposes that the Qur’an was revealed to God’s Messenger. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The pronoun refers to God; “about Me” shifts from the preceding third-person mention of God to first person, and is governed by “asked.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قيل): Some qualify the promise by God’s will, as stated explicitly in another verse. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyān b. ʿUyayna says people should not stop praying because of their faults, since God answered even Iblīs’s request to be reprieved. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو رجاء الخراساني): Abū Rajāʾ al-Khurāsānī glosses it as praying to God. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Anas reports that the Prophet quoted God as saying, ‘I am as My servant thinks of Me, and I am with him when he calls upon Me.’ IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أبو هريرة): Abū Hurayra reports God’s promise to be with His servant while the servant remembers Him and moves his lips in remembrance. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): Ibn Kathīr links this assurance of divine company to God’s being with the pious and doers of good, and His promise to Moses and Aaron to hear and see them. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أنس): Al-Bazzār reports from Anas through al-Ḥasan that God assigns worship without partners to Himself, recompenses the servant’s deeds, and makes prayer the shared matter whose answer is His part. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): The fragment says رأيت takes a direct object because it contains the sense of تنظر. BURHAN, d. 794 (ابن مالك): Ibn Mālik objects to Ibn al-Ḥājib’s use of الرحمن as an example of a noun ending in added alif and nūn: it is a divine proper name, normally inseparable from the article and rarely bare except in vocative. BURHAN, d. 794 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī, unaware of Ibn Mālik’s argument, dismissed it as stubbornness in disbelief; al-Shāṭibī’s line using رحمانا was criticized for intending the established divine name. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): A lām can follow an apparent an without carrying causation when the speech contains the sense of intent or will. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (ناصر الدين بن ميلق): Nāṣir al-Dīn ibn Milayq says direct divine speech suits a God already known through His acts, signs, and innate reason; moons and similar matters require the Prophet to convey what reason cannot know. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (عمر): ʿUmar reports that the Prophet and Abū Bakr once spoke as though in a foreign tongue that ʿUmar could not understand, illustrating their different spiritual rank. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī sees the Qur’an’s repeated “say” as an explicit cue that anyone hearing it is listening to God's speech. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Biqai invokes the Qur’an’s statement that it has been made easy for remembrance in support of the call to respond to God. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): If a self-sufficient master undertakes to answer a servant, the needy servant has still greater reason to answer the master's summons. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أنس عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Anas reports God’s words: He is as His servant expects and is with the servant when called upon. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (سلمان الفارسي عن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Salman reports that God is Living and Generous and is shy to return a servant’s raised hands empty; al-Tirmidhi graded the report good and al-Hakim called it sound. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عبد الله بن شبيب): When ʿAbd Allah ibn Shabib prayed aloud beside Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib, Saʿid rebuked him for acting as if God were not near. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): The Quran’s many references to mercy are listed among the divine attributes discussed in this section. ITQAN, d. 911 (الإمام فخر الدين): Fakhr al-Din al-Razi says psychological states have an onset and an outcome: divine anger means intending harm, not bodily agitation, and divine shyness means refraining, not inward shrinking. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The sharia and Sufi path censure failing to ask God to remove distress, as if resisting Him or claiming one can endure His hardships; a Mathnawī couplet says supplication remedies calamity. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Yahya al-Barmaki supported Sufyan al-Thawri with a thousand dirhams monthly; Sufyan prayed that God cover Yahya's afterlife, and a companion later dreamed Yahya said he was forgiven through Sufyan's prayer. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (الصائب): A verse by al-Ṣāʾib urges lighting a lamp for the world's dark days so that one has a lamp at the grave, illustrating good deeds that benefit in the afterlife. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (سهل بن عبد الله): During a Baghdad drought, Muslims' unanswered supplication and Jews' answered supplication puzzled the caliph; Sahl explained that delay showed God's love for Muslims, while haste turned the disliked Jews away. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Supplicants should invoke God's beautiful names and transmitted early prayers, and seek intercession through prophets, saints, and the righteous. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The shift to addressing the Prophet while speaking of “My servants” honors him and raises his rank. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): An omitted command to tell them is required for the conditional answer to follow; its omission shows God undertook the answer Himself rather than leaving it to the Messenger. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Many Qur’anic passages command or commend supplication; the warning about hardened hearts shows that God is angry with those who do not turn to Him. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Bazıları): They argue that God already knows hidden intentions and circumstances, so prayer cannot inform Him and seems unnecessary. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God says “I am near,” rather than “My servants are near Me,” because a contingent creature cannot approach God by its own being; nearness comes from God’s side. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Another hadith defines worship as supplication and cites the command to call upon God and receive His response. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Treating possible essences as eternally uncreated would multiply self-necessary principles or posit a principle binding God, contradicting God's sole status as First Cause. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Aleyhissalâtü vesselâm Efendimiz): The Prophet is quoted as saying God determined destinies a certain number of years before creating creation; Elmalılı gives no grading. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Just as God answers their prayers, people must answer His call and believe in Him. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): It also rejects the Ijabiyya, who subject God's knowledge and will to fate and deny divine choice; denying God's creative power or knowledge is sheer ignorance. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Elmalılı 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
