<<chunk 82, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:186/q25", "question": "What other Arabic grammar or lexical points occur in the cited passages?", "turns_on": "The sources give different analyses, reports, or applications of this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:186/q25/p1", "position": "The sources cite poems and lexical usages for the words of the verse.", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI, d. 465 (قائلهم): An anonymous poem swears allegiance to the beloved and refuses any substitute, affirming trust in the beloved alone. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (علي): Ali warns Nawf against being a poet, tax official, police officer, collector, or customs collector; David's night prayer excluded those jobs and players of the tambourine or drum. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Ajību follows the pronoun preceding the predicate rather than switching to third-person agreement with qarīb, the more usual Arab pattern; the author cites Q 27:55, Q 27:47, and an unattributed poem."}, {"id": "2:186/q25/p2", "position": "Sībawayh examines nominative coordination with wāw and rare accusative constructions.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses nominative coordination with waw meaning 'with', contrasted with exceptional accusative analyses supplied by an omitted verb, citing Arab speech and poetry."}, {"id": "2:186/q25/p3", "position": "Sībawayh examines interrogative and informative kam, case, ellipsis, and poetic exceptions.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count noun, omitted prepositions, word order and poetic examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh discusses interrogative and informative kam, case of its count n
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
