<<chunk 82, part 4 of 0..5>>
The source passages include ancillary textual, historical, and methodological observations.", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): Al-Baqillani argues for the Quran's inimitability across generations against reducing the proof to reports of unseen events. BAQILLANI (author): Al-Baqillani argues for the Quran's inimitability across generations against reducing the proof to reports of unseen events. BAQILLANI (author): Al-Baqillani argues for the Quran's inimitability across generations against reducing the proof to reports of unseen events. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): Al-Wāḥidī says his concise tafsīr aims to lead trained readers from doubt to certain knowledge; beginners lacking adab, grammar, and argument skills will struggle to use it. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (author): He begins each verse with Ibn ʿAbbās where a transmitted text is available, then other exemplary Companions and Successors, reconciling their statements with the verse wording; he omits interpretations the wording cannot bear. WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 (زهير): Zuhayr's verse uses answered for rain falling upon the hills in response to a rain cloud. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The same applies to earning and provision: they are settled in principle and are neither increased by seeking nor reduced by leaving them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو محمد عبد الحق): Abu Muhammad Abd al-Haqq graded the Abu Sa'id report sound; Abu Umar says it appears in the Muwatta with a disconnected chain. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another account links the verse to people who ate after sleeping, contrary to the initial rule, then regretted it; the verse signaled repentance's acceptance and abrogation of that rule. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): “I answer the caller” may describe “near” or be a second predicate; its first-person form follows the preceding first-person expression, as Arabic allows agreement with either antecedent or predicate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash says it means to yield to the call. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (ثعلب): One analysis keeps the request sense of the istifʿāl form: let them ask for My response. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): A first parse makes ajību a nominative adjectival clause describing qarīb. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (الترمذي): Al-Tirmidhī grades the report from ʿUbāda ibn al-Ṣāmit ḥasan ṣaḥīḥ gharīb by this route. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): Silence in a different ruling does not transfer a restriction: tayammum’s two limbs do not inherit ablution’s four, and a food option in one expiation cannot be imported into another. BURHAN, d. 794 (ابن جني): When a conditional clause introduced by wāw is circumstantial, it needs no apodosis: the clause functions like a dependent adverbial, normally a single constituent, rather than an independent sentence. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): If the conditional clause receives its own answer, the wāw is coordinative rather than circumstantial; otherwise the sentence would lack an apodosis. BURHAN, d. 794 (author): The pattern فعّال also expresses intensive meanings, as in غفّار, منّان, توّاب, وهّاب, فعّال لما يريد, and صبّار شكور. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو عمرو الداني): Al-Dānī says a single recitation transmits only some of the seven aḥruf, since one cannot simultaneously apply mutually exclusive vocalizations or word orders. NASHR, d. 833 (محمد بن جرير الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī and others answer that reading all seven was a permission, not an obligation; the Companions could lawfully unite on one letter to prevent division and fighting. NASHR, d. 833 (author): Of thirty disputed yāʾs in this category, two occur in al-Baqara: بيتي للطائفين and بي لعلهم يرشدون. NASHR, d. 833 (الكفاية والجامع لابن فارس والمستنير والتجريد): These sources give Qālūn, by Abū Nashīṭ, affirmation in الداع and deletion in دعان; al-Mabhaj gives this pattern by Ibn Būyān from Abū Nashīṭ. NASHR, d. 833 (التجريد والعنوان): Other sources give Qālūn the reverse pattern: deletion in الداع and affirmation in دعان, including al-Tajrīd through al-Ḥulwānī and Abū ʿAwn. NASHR, d. 833 (author): Ibn al-Jazarī accepts both patterns from Qālūn but prefers deletion as the more frequent and famous transmission. NASHR, d. 833 (المبهج عن الشذائي عن ابن شنبوذ عن قنبل): Al-Mabhaj reports affirmation in الداع for Qunbul through al-Shadhāʾī and Ibn Shanabūdh; Ibn al-Jazarī regards the attribution as doubtful. NASHR, d. 833 (ابن شنبوذ عن ورش من طريق الأزرق): Ibn Shanabūdh reports deletion of the yāʾ in دعان for Warsh through al-Azraq; the excerpt breaks off as al-Dānī begins his comment. NASHR, d. 833 (أبو عمرو وأبو جعفر ويعقوب وورش): Abū ʿAmr, Abū Jaʿfar, Yaʿqūb, and Warsh affirm the yāʾ in both occurrences of the phrase in al-Baqara. ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Al-Suyuti corrects the count: the questions about the spirit and Dhul-Qarnayn came from Meccan polytheists and Jews, not Companions, leaving twelve Companion questions as in the sound report. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Taking practical means is obligatory for ordinary people and beginners in the path; trust is better for intermediates, while perfected saints regard trust and taking means as equal. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The condition “when he calls Me” requires the caller to possess the stated quality genuinely, as in listening to an adviser when he truly advises or honoring a person who truly knows. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): This report illustrates that a word’s right meaning is established by its usage in revelation; the source notes similar cases concerning “part” and “much.” QIRAAT-ER (Yz): The variant cluster also affects daʿānī: the pausal form drops the nūn of protection, while the full form restores the first person suffix. STUDYQURAN (R): R notes that yastajībū can be read semantically as “let them ask of Me,” echoing the verse's opening. BURHAN, d. 794 (إمام الحرمين): Imām al-Ḥaramayn rejects the claim that the Qurʾān is like one verse, allowing unrestricted wording to be restricted elsewhere: only the eternal divine attribute is one, while its expressions are multiple and include opposites."}]}
{"id": "2:192/q01", "question": "What does intahaw mean in Arabic?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:192/q01/p1", "position": "It means to desist or abstain, originally by responding to a prohibition and then more broadly by leaving an act or intention.", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabrisī contrasts nahy, which forbids by a negative command and disapproval, with amr, which urges by a positive command and the commander's intent; he adduces nahy as a pond holding water back, nuhya for intellect, tanhiya for a rainwater hollow, and inhāʾ for bringing something to a limit. Ibn ʿĀshūr explains the broadened sense because prohibition asks one to leave an act whether already begun or not; he cites al-Nābigha's line forbidding Banū Dhibyān certain acts. Abū Ḥayyān glosses intahā as desisting."}]}
{"id": "2:192/q02", "question": "How is intahaw formed?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:192/q02/p1", "position": "It is an iftaʿala form from nahā, describing a subject's action upon himself.", "reasons": "Abū Ḥayyān compares iḍṭaraba. Al-Samīn derives intahaw from intahiyū: either the yāʾ is deleted after a heavy ḍamma, or it becomes alif after moving and the alif is deleted when two sukūns meet."}]}
{"id": "2:192/q03", "question": "Which opponents are addressed by the condition?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:192/q03/p1", "position": "Arab polytheists are addressed.", "reasons": "Elmalılı points to 2:191's reference to expelling Muslims from where they had been expelled; People of the Book could submit by paying the poll tax, whereas Arab polytheists had to accept Islam or face the sword."}]}
{"id": "2:192/q04", "question": "What must the opponents desist from?", "turns_on": "Whether the condition follows the immediate command to fight, the promise of divine forgiveness, or both fighting and shirk in the preceding context; 2:193 and 9:6 are also invoked.", "positions": [{"id": "2:192/q04/p1", "position": "They must cease fighting and disbelief or shirk and enter Islam.", "reasons": "Muqātil adds affirmation of God's oneness; al-Ṭabarī adds repentance and return from past sins; Ibn Kathīr specifies fighting in the sanctuary and says even killing Muslims there can be forgiven. Abū Ḥayyān calls this reading good because both fighting and shirk precede the clause. Al-Ālūsī likewise cites both in the context. Bursevī says combat alone cannot entitle them to forgiveness, much less mercy. Al-Qurṭubī cites 8:38."}, {"id": "2:192/q04/p2", "position": "They must leave disbelief through repentance and enter Islam.", "reasons": "Mujāhid glosses desistance as repentance; al-Ṭabrisī and al-Ālūsī specify repentance from unbelief. Al-Ḥasan and Abū Ḥayyān reason that forgiveness and mercy do not apply to one remaining an unbeliever; Abū Ḥayyān prefers this on the context and 8:38. Al-Rāzī distinguishes public profession, which protects life, from genuine faith, which earns reward and forgiveness. Study Quran reports this as an interpretation of idolaters' conversion."}, {"id": "2:192/q04/p3", "position": "They need only stop fighting and hostility here.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAbbās says permission to fight aims to stop the enemy's fighting; al-Samīn supplies 'from fighting' as the omitted complement. Al-Biqāʿī includes fighting's preliminaries. Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾ limits this clause to combat at the Sacred Mosque and assigns cessation through Islam to 2:193. Study Quran objects to making conversion the end of hostilities: fighting and expulsion have political causes, and 9:6 grants safe conduct to an idolater seeking asylum."}]}
{"id": "2:192/q05", "question": "What is understood but unstated in the conditional sentence?", "turns_on": "Whether the omission concerns what the opponents desist from or the ruling that follows their desistance.", "positions": [{"id": "2:192/q05/p1", "position": "The complement of 'desist' is omitted and supplied by the preceding context.", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabrisī says the preceding context makes the abb
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
