<<chunk 84, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:204/q12", "question": "What speech is pleasing?", "turns_on": "Whether the speech is a profession of religion, a claim in dispute, or worldly talk.", "positions": [{"id": "2:204/q12/p1", "position": "An outward profession of Islam, love, loyalty or faith that contradicts the heart.", "reasons": "MUQATIL:2:204-206/r1 (MUQATIL; reports): Muqatil: al-Akhnas professed love for Muhammad and swore to follow Islam; the Prophet welcomed him although he intended otherwise. IBNHISHAM:v2p174/r2 (IBNHISHAM; holds): Ibn Ishaq: hypocrite displays Islam with tongue while heart contradicts. TAB-FULL:v3p572/r2 (TAB-FULL; reports): Al-Suddi: al-Akhnas professed Islam and swore sincerity, then burned Muslim crops and killed donkeys, occasioning 2:205. TAB-FULL:v3p576#2/r1 (TAB-FULL; reports): Mujahid: pleasing speech is outward public presentation in worldly life. TAB-FULL:v3p576#2/r3 (TAB-FULL; reports): Al-Rabi: good speech, bad deeds; speaks pleasantly to Messenger then leaves to corrupt. TAB-FULL:v3p576#2/r4 (TAB-FULL; reports): Ata: words differ from heart, which God knows. TAB-FULL:v3p576#2/r5 (TAB-FULL; reports): Majority readers: hypocrite calls God to witness profession matches belief, though he lies. TAB-FULL:v3p576/r1 (TAB-FULL; reports): Said al-Maqburi quotes scripture: honey tongues, bitter hearts, soft manners, worldly gain through religion; God threatens bewildering trial. ZAJJAJ:v1p276/r5 (رجل من ثقيف; reports): A report says a man from Thaqīf impressed the Prophet with his speech while inwardly concealing the opposite of his attractive outward presentation. IBNABIHATIM:v2p363/r2 (ابن عباس; reports): Ibn ʿAbbās says the speech is what the person displays of Islam with his tongue. IBNABIHATIM:v2p363/r3 (مجاهد وعطاء; reports): Mujāhid and ʿAṭāʾ gloss this as a person's outward presentation in worldly life. IBNABIHATIM:v2p363/r4 (أبو العالية; reports): Abū al-ʿĀliya describes a man with good speech but bad deeds who speaks well to the Prophet. IBNABIHATIM:v2p363/r5 (رسول الله; reports): The Prophet warns of honeyed tongues, bitter hearts, worldly exploitation of religion, and a trial that confounds the forbearing. | mentions 2:205 IBNABIHATIM:v2p363/r7 (ابن عباس; reports): Ibn ʿAbbās says the heart contradicts what the person says with his tongue. THALABI:v2p119#2/r1 (الكلبي والسدي ومقاتل وعطاء; reports): Al-Kalbi, al-Suddi, Muqatil, and Ata say the verse concerns al-Akhnas ibn Shariq, a polished hypocrite who professed love for Muhammad, withdrew Banu Zuhra at Badr, then destroyed crops and livestock. MAWARDI-FULL:v1p264/r2 (author; reports): The alternative is that he professes love for the Messenger and eagerness for his religion. WAHIDI-ASBAB:v1p65/r3 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddi identifies the hypocritical speaker as al-Akhnas ibn Shariq: after professing sincerity to Muhammad, he burned Muslim crops and hamstrung their donkeys, prompting the next verse. WAHIDI-BASIT:v4p74/r1 (الكلبي والسدي ومقاتل وابن عباس في رواية عطاء; reports): They say the verse was revealed about al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, called Akhnas because he withdrew with 300 men of Banu Zuhra from Badr; he charmed the Prophet, professed Islam and love, swore sincerity, and was a hypocrite inwardly. WAHIDI-WAJIZ:2:203-204/r5 (author; holds): The person is al-Akhnas ibn Shariq, a hypocrite with smooth speech and a good public face but evil inward character. JISHUMI:v1p835/r19 (author; holds): The passage shows hypocrisy is religiously blameworthy and faith is not mere profession. KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p278#2/r2 (author; holds): The man is al-Akhnas ibn Shariq, eloquent and smooth-tongued; he softened his speech to the Messenger, professed love and Islam, and claimed God knew he was truthful. KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p278#2/r4 (author; reports): “In the life of this world” may modify “his speech”: he professes love falsely for worldly gain, not for the hereafter or sincere faith. IBNATIYYA-FULL:v1p278#2/r1 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddi says the passage concerns al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq (whose name he gives as Ubay): he professed Islam, claimed sincerity, then burned Muslim crops and killed their donkeys. IBNATIYYA-FULL:v1p278#2/r5 (الترمذي; reports): A report cited in al-Tirmidhi from a divine book describes people with honey-sweet tongues and bitter hearts, who use religion for worldly gain and face a confounding trial. IBNATIYYA-FULL:v1p278#2/r8 (author; prefers): The majority reading more sharply condemns one who deliberately adopts good speech while inwardly contradicting it; he claims goodness in his heart. TABRISI:2:204-205/r15 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddī identifies the referent as al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, who displayed affection for the Prophet and Islam while concealing the opposite. IBNJAWZI-ZAD:v1p218#3/r1 (ابن عباس والسدي ومقاتل; reports): They say the verse concerns al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, whose gentle speech and professions of love and following Islam concealed unbelief and hostility. RAZI-FULL:v5p167#2/r4 (الرواية الأولى; reports): One report identifies al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, an ally of Banū Zuhra, who professed Islam, claimed love for the Prophet, then burned a Muslim’s crops and killed livestock. RAZI-FULL:v5p168/r10 (author; holds): Calling God witness does not establish hypocrisy: the verse never says he professes Islam while inwardly rejecting it; he may instead hide corruption and display its opposite as a show-off. RAZI-FULL:v5p169/r3 (author; reports): A second reading contrasts this life with the afterlife: he is eloquent and sweet-tongued here, but fear of God’s majesty leaves him stammering there. QURTUBI-FULL:2:204/r1 (author; holds): After contrasting those who ask only for worldly good in 2:200 with believers asking for both abodes in 2:201, the passage turns to hypocrites who profess faith but conceal unbelief. | mentions 2:200, 2:201 QURTUBI-FULL:2:204/r2 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddi and other exegetes say the verse concerns al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, who withdrew at Badr with 300 allies, later professed Islam to the Prophet, then burned Muslims' crops and killed their donkeys. QURTUBI-FULL:2:204/r9 (ابن محيصن; reports): Ibn Muhaysin reads the verb actively and Allah in the nominative: the speech pleases, while God knows the speaker's heart contradicts it; 63:1 supports this sense. | mentions 63:1 BAYDAWI-FULL:2:204/r2 (author; holds): “In worldly life” may qualify what he says about worldly affairs and livelihood, or refer to the world as the object of professed love and displayed faith. BAYDAWI-FULL:2:204/r6 (قيل; reports): One reported occasion identifies the man as al-Akhnaṣ ibn Shurayq al-Thaqafī, handsome and eloquent, who professed loyalty to the Messenger and Islam. NASAFI-FULL:v1p99#2/r1 (الأخنس بن شريق; reports): The verse was revealed about al-Akhnas ibn Sharīq: he spoke sweetly to the Messenger, professed love and Islam, and claimed God knew he was sincere. NASAFI-FULL:v1p99#2/r3 (author; reports): The phrase may modify ‘his speech’: he seeks worldly advantage through professed love, not the afterlife; or it may modify ‘pleases you’: his eloquence charms in this life but fails him in the next. ABUHAYYAN-FULL:v2p324/r6 (عطاء والكلبي ومقاتل; reports): A reported occasion identifies al-Akhnas ibn Shariq, also called Ubayy, as a smooth-tongued, attractive man who professed love and Islam to the Prophet, concealed his intent, then burned Thaqif's crops and killed their livestock after a dispute. ABUHAYYAN-FULL:v2p326/r10 (author; prefers): Abu Hayyan's apparent sense is that the hypocrite exposes his concealed disbelief to God alone, since what is in his heart contradicts his public claim. SAMIN-DURR:2:204/r5 (author; reports): Fī al-ḥayāt may modify qawlihi: he impresses the listener with claims about worldly affairs because he seeks worldly advantage through false professions of love. IBNKATHIR-FULL:v1p562#2/r1 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddi says the verse was revealed about al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq, who professed Islam to the Prophet while concealing the opposite. IBNKATHIR-FULL:v1p562#2/r4 (نوف البكالي; reports): Nauf says scripture describes people who pursue worldly gain through religion, with honeyed tongues and bitter hearts, sheep-like exteriors and wolf-like hearts; God warns of a trial that confounds the wise. DURR-FULL:v1p571/r2 (ابن عباس; reports): Ibn ʿAbbas explains that the man’s speech outwardly displays Islam, while his heart contradicts what his tongue says. DURR-FULL:v1p572/r1 (author; reports): The continuing report says the verse concerns al-Akhnas ibn Shariq, who professed sincere Islam to the Prophet in Medina, impressed him, then burned a Muslim’s crops and hamstrung his donkeys after leaving. DURR-FULL:v1p572/r3 (محمد بن كعب القرظي; reports): Saʿid al-Maqburi quotes a divine warning about honeyed tongues, bitter hearts, and using religion for worldly gain; Muhammad ibn Kaʿb identifies its subject with this verse, and Saʿid says he knew its particular referent. SUYUTI-LUBAB:v1p40/r2 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddi identifies al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq: he professed Islam to the Prophet, then burned Muslims’ crops and hamstrung their donkeys, prompting the verse. BURSEVI:v1p264#2/r5 (author; holds): He says that God witnesses the love and Islam in his heart to agree with what his tongue professes. BURSEVI:v1p264#2/r7 (author; reports): The verse was revealed about al-Akh nas ibn Shurayq al-Thaqafī, handsome and eloquent, who professed alliance, Islam, love, and sincerity toward the Prophet. BURSEVI:v1p264#2/r9 (author; holds): Arabic verse and a couplet by Ḥāfiẓ illustrate that professed love is contradicted by disobedient deeds and falsehood; the true lover obeys the beloved. ALUSI-FULL:v2p94#2/r3 (author; holds): The phrase can mean worldly affairs and means of livelihood, whether they benefit him or not; alternatively, al-dunyā is intended because his claim professes love and faith. ALUSI-FULL:v2p94#2/r5 (السدي; reports): Al-Suddī says the verse was revealed about al-Akhnas ibn Sharīq, who professed Islam to the Prophet, then bur
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
