<<chunk 88, part 3 of 0..5>>
 combat.", "reasons": "Tabarisi reports the Prophet gesturing at the Trench; Ali prayed five prayers by gestures or, in another version, takbir on the night of al-Harir. Abdullah ibn Unays's mission supplies another concrete precedent."}, {"id": "2:239/q24/p5", "position": "Reports about speaking in prayer have disputed chronology and strength.", "reasons": "Biqai cites Ibn Masud's Abyssinia return report and Dhū al-Yadayn, notes Aisha's dating of Baqara and Nisa to her cohabitation in year two, and weighs Asim's weak route against Zayd in the two Sahihs."}]}
{"id": "2:239/q25", "question": "What lasting importance of prayer does the verse teach?", "turns_on": "Whether the emphasis falls on unceasing obligation, inward remembrance, prayer's benefits, or the isolated reclining comparison.", "positions": [{"id": "2:239/q25/p1", "position": "Prayer remains obligatory in every state, performed to the extent possible.", "reasons": "Ibn Jawzi, Qurtubi, Abu Hayyan, Tabatabai and Kuranyolu reason from the fear concession to illness, work and all other excuses; Qurtubi even permits eye gestures and says prayer cannot be delegated. Razi cites doing what one can; Ibn Kathir calls this a burden-easing concession. Ibn al-Arabi compares abandonment to repudiating a pillar akin to the testimonies; Qurtubi defers the legal discussion."}, {"id": "2:239/q25/p2", "position": "Its essential purpose is continuing remembrance and the heart's attention to God.", "reasons": "Harali makes remembrance the basis of safety and says complete inward turning preserves prayer; Biqai invokes God's name to reinforce presence. Kuranyolu says movements serve this inner relation and may be omitted when impossible; Elmalili says ongoing prayers preserve awareness of divine favor."}, {"id": "2:239/q25/p3", "position": "The five prayers are a banquet of varied benefits.", "reasons": "Bursevi compares their pillars to dishes bringing pleasure and atonement; Ka'b al-Ahbar's address to Moses assigns distinct benefits to noon, afternoon, sunset and night prayers."}, {"id": "2:239/q25/p4", "position": "Qur'anic reclining evokes complete comfort in Paradise.", "reasons": "Samarrai says reclining there normally accompanies food, drink and family, with one exception."}]}
{"id": "2:239/q26", "question": "What does fear itself mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:239/q26/p1", "position": "Fear is the opposite of security and denotes alarm or panic.", "reasons": "Jishumi defines it by its opposite; Qurtubi specifies fright or panic."}]}
{"id": "2:239/q27", "question": "What posture is normal before fear requires a concession?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:239/q27/p1", "position": "Standing calmly and devoutly with still limbs is the normal prayer.", "reasons": "Ibn Atiyya defines qunūt as solemn tranquility and stillness."}]}
{"id": "2:239/q28", "question": "Does the verse address prayer amid active combat?", "turns_on": "Whether the wording covers combat generally or identifies a particular prayer.", "positions": [{"id": "2:239/q28/p1", "position": "Yes, including sword fighting when ordinary posture is impossible.", "reasons": "Tawus locates it in sword fighting; Wahidi and Tabari identify intense combat rather than the divided-group prayer. Hasan and Shafi'i permit gestures while fighting, and Baydawi says Shafi'i deems prayer obligatory even while moving. Tabari cites the Prophetic distinction between ordinary fear and intermingled combat."}, {"id": "2:239/q28/p2", "position": "The prayer is specifically the dawn prayer in life-threatening sword combat.", "reasons": "Abu Hayyan reports this narrower interpretation, also distinguishing it from imam-led divided groups."}]}
{"id": "2:239/q29", "question": "Which other word-order explanations appear in the surrounding rhetorical material?", "turns_on": "The differing rhetorical rationales in the cited adjacent discussions.", "positions": [{"id": "2:239/q29/p1", "position": "Hearing precedes knowing because sound seems nearer and warns more directly.", "reasons": "Burhan adds that God's knowledge still encompasses hidden and manifest matters."}, {"id": "2:239/q29/p2", "position": "Forgiveness precedes mercy because safety comes before gain.", "reasons": "Burhan contrasts Saba 34:2, where mercy precedes because it covers all creation while forgiveness is narrower."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q25", "question": "Who is the سفِيه debtor?", "turns_on": "Whether foolishness denotes ignorance, wastefulness, childhood, or impairment.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q25/p1", "position": "A financially ignorant or imprudent person", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid explains the fool as someone ignorant about dictation and practical affairs. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers ignorance of right and wrong in dictation as the meaning of foolishness; it can describe any uninformed person, but the verse most directly concerns competent adults rather than children, who cannot transact debts. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is ignorant about dictating the debt; Ibn ʿAbbas and Saʿid ibn Jubayr report similarly. THALABI (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets a foolish debtor as someone ignorant about money. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is one ignorant of the correct way to dictate what he owes. MAWARDI-FULL (الشافعي): A foolish debtor may be one who squanders wealth and is corrupt in religion. MAWARDI-FULL (author): A foolish debtor may fail to understand the value of money and waste it instead of seeking to grow it. WAHIDI-BASIT (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets safīh as someone ignorant about dictating the debt. JISHUMI (مجاهد): Mujāhid glosses safīh as someone ignorant about dictation. BAGHAWI-FULL (مجاهد): Safīh means someone ignorant of how to dictate; al-Dahhak and al-Suddi say it means a young child; al-Shafiʿi says a squanderer who corrupts his property or religion. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A safīh is restricted for wastefulness and poor judgment; a weak person may be a child or confused elder, and inability to dictate may come from speech difficulty or muteness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A safīh is someone with weak judgment about money who cannot manage either taking or giving; the term also applies when rights such as inheritance are apportioned. TABRISI (author): بخس is unjust diminution; safīh means ignorant or light-minded, named for the lightness of reason. TABRISI (القاضي): Al-Qāḍī differentiates the three: the foolish person squanders, the weak person is an adolescent, and the one unable to dictate is insane. TABRISI (author): The debtor may be a fool through ignorance, childhood, or impaired understanding; weak may mean intellectual disability or senility, and inability may mean madness, stammering, or muteness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid and Ibn Jubayr define the “foolish” debtor as ignorant about property and unable to dictate. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (القاضي أبو يعلى): Qadi Abu Yaʿla says foolish here means someone who squanders money. NASAFI-FULL (author): Safīh may mean mentally impaired or legally restrained for wastefulness and poor judgment; ḍaʿīf means a child; inability includes stammering, muteness, or not knowing the language. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The three categories are distinct: safīh is profligate or poor at managing money, weak has bodily impairment from childhood or advanced age, and inability to dictate is speech impairment or muteness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد وابن جبير): Mujāhid and Ibn Jubayr define safīh as someone ignorant of practical matters and dictation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī defines safīh as someone who squanders wealth and corrupts his religion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says safīh is one ignorant of Islam; other glosses call him a fool or someone who does not value or grow money. ELMALILI (author): A debtor unable to dictate includes a spendthrift fool, a minor or mentally deficient person, or anyone unable because of muteness, stammering, ignorance, or another cause."}, {"id": "2:282/q25/p2", "position": "A young child or minor", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī interprets the fool here as a young child. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk also identifies the fool as a young child. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects interpreting the fool as a child and the weak as an adult idiot: a sane adult, even if mute or absent, has no guardian who can dispose of his property without authorization. IBNABIHATIM (السدى): A foolish debtor is a minor. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن): A foolish debtor may be a child or a woman. WAHIDI-BASIT (الضحاك والسدي): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and al-Suddī interpret safīh as a young child. JISHUMI (السدي والضحاك): Al-Suddī and al-Ḍaḥḥāk gloss safīh as a young child. JISHUMI (القاضي): The Qāḍī’s preferred mapping is a spendthrift for safīh, an adolescent child for weak, and an insane person as unable to dictate; each label may include equivalents. JISHUMI (author): The author construes the foolish debtor as insane, the weak as a minor, and the unable speaker as mute or similarly unable. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعض الناس): Some say safīh means a young child, which the author rejects as mistaken. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the foolish debtor is a child or a woman. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak and al-Suddi identify the foolish debtor as a minor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد والسدي): Mujāhid and al-Suddī also describe the weak person as a fool; others say a minor or one with diminished faculties. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says safīh means a child or a woman. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الضحاك والسدي): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and al-Suddī interpret safīh as a minor. BIQAI-FULL (author): A foolish debtor lacks sound judgment, so his admission is not treated as reliable; a weak person may be temporarily ill, young, old, or otherwise impaired. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Safīh means cognitively impaired, ḍaʿīf means a minor, and one unable to dictate is incapacitated, such as someone simultaneously mute, blind, and deaf. | mentions 2:142, 2:266"}, {"id": "2:282/q25/p3", "position":
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
