<<chunk 88, part 4 of 0..5>>
 "Safīh denotes a person deficient in handling the debt.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The fool can dictate but lacks sound judgment; the weak cannot dictate through a speech impediment or muteness; one unable to dictate is prevented by confinement or absence. In these cases the creditor dictates fairly. JISHUMI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd glosses safīh as incapable or foolish. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A reading puts qalbahu in the accusative, like safiha nafsahu in 2:130. | mentions 2:130 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Safīh is likened to loosely woven cloth; safah means lightness, as shown by Dhu al-Rumma’s poetic use of tasaffaht. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Under religious law, a financially incompetent safīh is under the guardianship of a father or appointed guardian. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He rejects an attribution to Ibn Abbas allowing a creditor to dictate a foolish debtor’s debt: it would impose an unproven liability outside the law; at most it could concern illness preventing dictation, which the verse does not mean. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A fool has poor financial judgment and cannot manage giving or receiving; the word is likened to a loosely woven cloth, and can also describe crude speech associated with shallow minds."}, {"id": "2:282/q25/p4", "position": "A mentally impaired person", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): The verse covers three recurrent cases: the financially incompetent spendthrift, the mentally deficient, and one unable to dictate because absent or ill; their guardians are respectively a guardian or executor, father or executor, and agent, with the mute among the weak or unable."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q26", "question": "Who is the ضعيف debtor?", "turns_on": "Whether weakness denotes age, childhood, intellect, or speech.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q26/p1", "position": "A child or minor", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects interpreting the fool as a child and the weak as an adult idiot: a sane adult, even if mute or absent, has no guardian who can dispose of his property without authorization. THALABI (الضحاك والسدي): Al-Dahhak and al-Suddi include a child or a weak person, such as an elderly person, among those needing a guardian to dictate. JISHUMI (author): The author construes the foolish debtor as insane, the weak as a minor, and the unable speaker as mute or similarly unable. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A safīh is restricted for wastefulness and poor judgment; a weak person may be a child or confused elder, and inability to dictate may come from speech difficulty or muteness. TABRISI (author): The debtor may be a fool through ignorance, childhood, or impaired understanding; weak may mean intellectual disability or senility, and inability may mean madness, stammering, or muteness. NASAFI-FULL (author): Safīh may mean mentally impaired or legally restrained for wastefulness and poor judgment; ḍaʿīf means a child; inability includes stammering, muteness, or not knowing the language. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد والسدي): Mujāhid and al-Suddī also describe the weak person as a fool; others say a minor or one with diminished faculties. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The three categories are distinct: safīh is profligate or poor at managing money, weak has bodily impairment from childhood or advanced age, and inability to dictate is speech impairment or muteness. ALUSI-FULL (author): 'Weak' means a child or senile elder; inability to dictate may be muteness, as reported from Ibn ʿAbbās, or any impediment including unfamiliarity with the language. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Safīh means cognitively impaired, ḍaʿīf means a minor, and one unable to dictate is incapacitated, such as someone simultaneously mute, blind, and deaf. | mentions 2:142, 2:266 ASAD-NOTES (author): A debtor may be unable to dictate because of physical disability, difficulty understanding business terms, or unfamiliarity with the contract language; weakness of understanding or body includes minors and mentally diminished elders. STUDYQURAN (IK, Ṭ): The debtor described as feeble-minded, weak, or unable to dictate is interpreted respectively as mentally disabled, a minor, or incapacitated by illness."}, {"id": "2:282/q26/p2", "position": "A mentally impaired person", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The fool can dictate but lacks sound judgment; the weak cannot dictate through a speech impediment or muteness; one unable to dictate is prevented by confinement or absence. In these cases the creditor dictates fairly. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the guardian of a foolish or weak debtor is ordered to dictate fairly. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī interprets the weak person as an idiot. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid likewise says the weak person is an idiot. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد والسدى): Mujahid and al-Suddi interpret a weak debtor as foolish. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿid ibn Jubayr says a weak debtor may be incapable, mute, or mentally impaired. WAHIDI-BASIT (السدي وابن زيد): Al-Suddī and Ibn Zayd explain weak as incapable or mentally deficient. JISHUMI (author): The verse implies that rulers and judges must be appointed, since a fool's and a weak person's affairs cannot be managed without them. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A “weak” person has impaired intellect or an innate deficiency and may likewise have a father or guardian. TABRISI (القاضي): Al-Qāḍī differentiates the three: the foolish person squanders, the weak person is an adolescent, and the one unable to dictate is insane. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas and Ibn Jubayr explain “weak” as incapacitated, mute, or mentally unsound. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The weak debtor is someone impaired in reason or nature and unable to dictate because of stammering, muteness, or inability to express himself; his guardian may be a father or trustee. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس وابن جبير): They interpret ḍaʿīf as an incapacitated person, a mute, or someone mentally impaired."}, {"id": "2:282/q26/p3", "position": "Ḍaʿīf denotes a person too weak to dictate reliably.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd describes a weak debtor as unable to recognize and establish the other party's right, so his guardian acts in his place. IBNABIHATIM (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi defines a weak debtor as one who merits legal interdiction. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد والشعبي): A weak debtor may be dull or incompetent. JISHUMI (author): The acknowledgment of an incapable or weak debtor is not accepted; his guardian dictates in his place."}, {"id": "2:282/q26/p4", "position": "An elderly or senile person", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Weak is explained as sick or senile with age; unable to dictate includes muteness, foreign speech, or similar inability. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Ḍaʿīf may mean an elderly man or someone mentally weak from impairment or madness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Some say weak means an elderly fool; the author calls this a good interpretation. BIQAI-FULL (author): A foolish debtor lacks sound judgment, so his admission is not treated as reliable; a weak person may be temporarily ill, young, old, or otherwise impaired."}, {"id": "2:282/q26/p5", "position": "A person with speech difficulty or muteness", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (الطبري): A weak debtor may be unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī says weak refers to someone unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q61", "question": "What is meant by أدنى ألا ترتابوا?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q61/p1", "position": "It prevents doubt about amount and due date", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. TAB-FULL (author): Writing every debt, large or small, makes the transaction more just, gives witnesses a sounder basis, and helps prevent doubt about the amount and due date. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Documentation prevents doubt about the right, due date, and testimony; al-Suddi and Sufyan specify avoiding doubt in testimony, while Muqatil links the clause to what is recorded. THALABI (author): A written record is more just, steadier for testimony, and less likely to leave doubt about the amount or term; the author compares this with another verse about giving testimony properly. | mentions 5:108 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. TABRISI (author): Do not weary of recording a debt, small or large, until its term; this is fairer, steadier testimony, and less likely to leave doubts about amount or term. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Writing is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and likelier to prevent doubt about debt kind, amount, date, and witnesses; aqsaṭ and aqwam have irregular morphological analyses. NASAFI-FULL (author): Writing is more equitable before God, better supports testimony, and reduces doubt about amount and qualities by providing a written reference. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Doubt may concern denial by the debtor, a witness forgetting, the testimony, amount or due date, or uncertainty for witness, judge, and parties. BURSEVI (author): Documenting it to the due date is fairest before God, strengthens testimony, and best prevents doubt about the debt, amount, term, or witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): Wri
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
