<<chunk 89, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:286/q01", "question": "What limit does God place on obligation?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q01/p1", "position": "God requires only what a person can perform.", "reasons": "FARRA: وسعها is a noun meaning capacity; its vocalic pattern parallels the alternatives in وجد and جهد. MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting أبو هريرة: The report glosses the capacity verse as assigning the soul the good it earns and charging it with the evil it acquires. TUSTARI: A soul's “capacity” means its strength or ability. TAB-FULL: God burdens a soul only with what lies within its capacity, imposing no constriction or excessive hardship in religious duties. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari distinguishes forgetfulness caused by neglect from forgetfulness caused by incapacity or weak memory. TAB-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak says it asks not to be burdened with deeds beyond their capacity. ZAJJAJ: God imposes no obligation, such as fasting, prayer, or charity, beyond a person's capacity. IBNABIHATIM reporting سفيان: Sufyān applies the capacity limit to spending: only what one can afford. IBNABIHATIM reporting سفيان الثوري: Sufyān al-Thawrī interprets the capacity limit as performance of obligatory duties. THALABI reporting بعضهم: One interpretation holds that God accounts for settled convictions and intentions, while passing thoughts without resolve are exempt under the capacity verse; the oath verse supplies a parallel. JISHUMI: Ṭāqa means strength or capacity. JISHUMI: God has not imposed commands and prohibitions beyond people’s capacity, removing their excuse. JISHUMI reporting أبو مسلم: Alternatively, it begins a new divine statement to the Messenger and believers, clarifying that earlier commands and prohibitions did not exceed capacity. BAGHAWI-FULL: The petition asks not to be charged with deeds beyond their capacity. TABRISI reporting سفيان بن عيينة: Sufyān ibn ʿUyayna calls it a good interpretation that God does not impose a person's full limit of capacity, which would exhaust their effort. TABRISI: A third explanation treats this as devotional petition, though God does not impose on anyone a burden beyond their capacity. RAZI-FULL: If the believers speak the clause, it follows their “we hear and obey”: since God mercifully requires only what is within capacity, they must respond with obedience as servants. RAZI-FULL: Al-Rāzī ends this dispute by asking God to show mercy to their incapacity and limited understanding and forgive their errors, affirming that they seek only truth. RAZI-FULL reporting بعض الناس: Some accept a distinction: kasb can be for oneself or another, while iktisāb is only what one acquires for oneself; one can be a breadwinner for one's family but not an acquirer for them. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Imran ibn Husayn reports that the Prophet instructed the ill to pray sitting, or on their side if unable; jurists read inability as severe hardship, not literal incapacity. No grading is stated. QURTUBI-FULL: This categorical statement says no bodily or inward act is imposed beyond a person’s capacity, understanding, and constitution, relieving the Muslims’ anxiety about thoughts. QURTUBI-FULL reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayra’s quoted couplet says God burdens no soul beyond its capacity and a hand gives only what it has. BAYDAWI-FULL: God burdens a soul only with what its ability can contain, by grace and mercy; alternatively, He gives less than its utmost capacity, making the duty manageable and easy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The apparent sense is a fresh divine report: God burdens people in inward and bodily acts only with what their capacity, faculties, and constitution can bear. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: An alternative makes these words part of the Messenger's and believers' speech: after saying “we hear and obey,” they reason that God asks only what they can bear. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak, with Ibn Zayd, interprets the prayer as asking not to be burdened with deeds beyond one's capacity. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting جابر: Jabir reports that after this verse was revealed, Gabriel told the Prophet that God had praised him and his community and invited him to ask; the Prophet then asked for the closing supplication beginning, 'God does not burden a soul beyond its capacity.' BURHAN: The author cites the verse's concise statement of capacity, responsibility, and earned reward as an example of eloquent concision. BIQAI-FULL: Ṭāqa means ability or capacity; the request asks not to be made to bear what they cannot manage. ALUSI-FULL: God's practice is to impose only what a person can bear, indeed sometimes less: five daily prayers despite capacity for more, and Ramadan despite capacity for additional fasting. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: An alternative makes both clauses part of believers' separate utterances, praising them for gratitude that duties fit their capacity and that good benefits them while evil harms them, not God; Al-Alusi calls this remote in one respect and close in another. ELMALILI: He reads the clause as showing the benefit of obligatory duties and urging believers to spend capacity beyond them on voluntary worship and good works, a recommendation called nadb. ELMALILI reporting الله: A qudsi hadith cited here says the believing servant continues drawing near to God through supererogatory acts, supporting the exhortation to spend surplus capacity in good works. ELMALILI: A second construal says properly directed effort earns benefit, while blind striving after harm costs the person; capacity-calibrated divine duties guide people toward benefit and away from loss. ELMALILI: A person who fails to learn religious and legal duties, or fails to review them after learning them, is not excused for later forgetting; some causes of forgetfulness are within human capacity to prevent. ELMALILI: “Pardon us” asks God to erase the effects of sins. People pledge sincere obedience but still fall short, cannot fully spend the God-given capacity and will in His path, and therefore ask through grace rather than earned merit; though deeds remain in divine knowledge, God can remove their consequences. ELMALILI: An obligation beyond given capacity would be torment rather than a duty; God appoints such torment as just punishment for refusing His law, as in the command to enter Hell at 40:76, with worldly examples among lawbreaking peoples and individuals. ELMALILI: The supplications that follow are connected to the wisdom that duties are proportionate to capacity and direct people away from harm. ELMALILI: God's obligations leave capacity beyond what is required, allowing rest and voluntary good deeds after duties; the five daily prayers do not exhaust a person's ability to act. ELMALILI: The same capacity principle governs how communal obligations fall on individuals, and the total duties assigned to one person must not exceed that person's capacity. ELMALILI: Elmalılı summarizes the greatest principle of legislative wisdom as duties being proportionate to the capacity of the person charged. IBNASHUR-FULL: The clause is circumstantial from nafs and explains capacity: good benefits the soul and evil harms it, marked respectively by li and ʿala. TABATABAI: Wasʿ means capacity; it first denotes spatial breadth, then metaphorically the capacity that contains a person’s possible acts. TABATABAI: Earning is evidence that a person acquires benefit or harm through acts that lie within their capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q01/p2", "position": "God requires only what a person can perform, with ease in religion.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the believers were given breadth in religion, citing the absence of hardship, God’s desire for ease, and the command to fear Him as able. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās says God eased believers' religion, linking this to no hardship (22:78), willing ease (2:185), and fear as much as possible (64:16). IBNABIHATIM reporting محمد بن كعب القرظي: Muḥammad ibn Kaʿb says people were not charged with work they could not bear; others are reported to agree. IBNATIYYA-FULL: This accords with verses saying God intends ease, places no hardship in religion, and requires mindfulness as far as possible. QURTUBI-FULL reporting ابن خويزمنداد: Ibn Khuwayzimandad says the verse’s apparent sense can rebut claims that a religious duty is unduly burdensome, in line with no hardship in religion and the report that religion is easy. NASAFI-FULL reporting شرح التأويلات: Obligation is limited to acts a person can perform, since responsibility concerns deeds within one’s ability. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report says he was sent with the upright, easy religion. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas says God eased religious duties for believers, linking this to no hardship in religion (22:78), God’s desire for ease (2:185), and fearing God as much as possible (64:16)."}, {"id": "2:286/q01/p3", "position": "Capacity here is manageable ability below a person's utmost exertion.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting ابن عباس: In another account, the verse concerns believers specifically: God eased religious duties and required only what they can do, as shown by verses affirming ease, no hardship, and duty according to capacity. QUSHAYRI: In perfect mercy, God sets people's charge at their capacity and far below that limit, out of gentleness and grace. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting ابن عباس: In another transmission, Ibn Abbas says God imposed only what believers can do, citing God's desire for ease, removal of hardship, and the command to fear Him as able. WAHIDI-BASIT: The best explanation is that capacity here is below full ability: God graciously burdens people with less than their maximum; Sufyan ibn Uyayna glosses it as ease, since a full-capacity burden would exhaust them. TABRISI: God commands or forbids only what a person can do; another ex
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
