<<chunk 89, part 5 of 0..5>>
ns; fleeting thoughts are not human acquisitions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī says good benefits the soul and evil harms it: no one bears another's sin or receives another's reward. SAMIN-DURR: The author prefers a distinction: good is earned without strain along God's prescribed way, while sin requires the intensified effort of breaking His prohibition. SAMIN-DURR: The sūra contains many branches of learning; most have already been indicated, and an intelligent reader can infer what is suggested without explicit detail. IBNKATHIR-FULL: What a person earns is good and what is charged against them is evil, in deeds that fall within moral obligation. ITQAN: The form اكتسبت suggests effort and excess in the clause about evil deeds, which weigh more heavily. BURSEVI: The soul alone receives the reward for all the good it has earned and bears the punishment for all the evil it has acquired; no one else independently shares either account. ELMALILI: The first plea asks that the community not be punished in this world or the next for unintentional omission or error: despite renewed resolve, generic liability for what one acquires could include a forgotten duty or unintended prohibited act. ELMALILI: A third construal treats gains made for oneself and others as truly in one’s own favor, while selfish gain driven by appetite harms the self, since even earning depends on other people; divine duty reconciles self-interest and altruism. ELMALILI: A fourth construal says one’s own earnings secure rights and benefit, whereas living on another’s earnings is against oneself; duties protect people from dependence and secure rights through charity and fair exchange, while forbidding begging, usury, and aggression. ELMALILI reporting Râgıb: Rāghib distinguishes kesb, which can benefit oneself or others, from iktisāb, which benefits only oneself; every iktisāb is kesb, but not every kesb is iktisāb, illustrated by forms for cooking, roasting, and baking. ELMALILI: These distinctions associate iktisāb with desire and kesb with wisdom, and allow the verse's paired terms to convey multiple meanings. ELMALILI: On one reading, each person's good deeds and their reward benefit that person, while their sins and the burden and punishment they incur harm that same person; 41:46 and 45:15 support the point. ELMALILI: Divine commands require good deeds, while prohibitions forbid evil; performing or abandoning each kind brings benefit or harm respectively to the person charged. ELMALILI: Al-Qāmūs glosses kesb, iktisāb, and tekassub as seeking provision or something beneficial even without obtaining it; in Turkish, kesb here is working or exerting power. IBNASHUR-FULL: Souls that seek good and salvation must expose themselves to one of the two paths after reflection; each bears what it has earned. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Al-Kashshaf says iktasaba signals exertion because the soul desires evil and works to obtain it. Against: IBNASHUR-FULL reporting بعض المفسرين: Some exegetes distinguish kasb as acquiring good from iktisab as acquiring evil, but Ibn Ashur rejects this as inaccurate and cites Quranic usage of kasaba for evil. Against: IBNASHUR-FULL: Believers prayed this before learning that God had lifted such accountability, so there is no need to follow al-Kashshaf's reading of forgetfulness and error as negligence that causes them. BINTSHATI-IJAZ reporting الفراء: Al-Farra defines iqtiraf as earning and cites the Arab expression for someone going out to earn for his family. BINTSHATI-IJAZ reporting أبو مسحل الأعرابي: Lexicographers connect qarf and iqtiraf with earning; Abu Mishal records six further verb pairs with the same meaning. BINTSHATI-IJAZ reporting أبو عبيدة: Abu Ubayda glosses iqtiraf in 6:120 as accusation or imputation, citing Ru'ba's line about the accusation of lying; the segment leaves the comparison with iktisab open. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The author identifies kesb as the verse’s explicit term for human contribution to action, meaning to acquire, earn, or deserve; the aphorism says the servant earns while God creates. STUDYQURAN reporting R, Ṭ: What a soul earns adds to its merit; sins it perpetrates are held against it. ZAJJAJ: No one is held accountable for another's sin, as stated by the verse that no bearer bears another's burden. JISHUMI: Each soul bears the burden for the sins it has committed. RAZI-FULL reporting كثير من المتكلمين: Many theologians use the verse to argue that God does not punish children for their parents’ sins, as also stated by 6:164. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses what accrues to a soul for or against it as its deeds. ELMALILI: The benefits and harms of obedience or sin accrue to those charged, not to God. Against: IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting المهدوي وغيره: Al-Mahdawi and others say no one is held accountable for another's sin; Ibn Atiyya says the principle is true but not established by this verse."}, {"id": "2:286/q06/p2", "position": "A person gains good and bears sin.", "reasons": "MUQATIL: A person gains good and bears sin."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q07", "question": "Why do كَسَبَتْ and ٱكْتَسَبَتْ differ?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q07/p1", "position": "The augmented form for evil suggests effort or intensity.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL reporting ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya says good deeds come without strain along God’s path, while evil requires forcefully breaching His prohibition; the two verb forms suit that distinction. NASAFI-FULL: Good is called kasb and evil iktisab because the iftiʿāl form suggests recoil: the soul recoils from evil and exerts itself for good. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting السجاوندي: Al-Sajāwandī explains the intensified form by saying evil clings to its doer, while good may be shared through guidance and intercession; iftiʿāl also suggests contraction, as the soul contracts into evil. BURHAN: The statement that every soul acquires only against itself concerns evil alone, by the occasion of revelation or by construing the verb as committing sin; the parallel verse states both good and evil, hence its contrast in verb forms. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī says the unaugmented verb denotes the least degree of earning, so even intending a good deed without doing it earns a good deed. ALUSI-FULL: The unaugmented kasabat suits good, which does not involve the same striving; iktasabat signals the soul's inclination to work at evil. MAWARDI-FULL: The forms may differ only in wording while sharing a meaning, or kasabat may be reserved for good and iktasabat for evil. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting قوم: One view distinguishes kasabat for a single occurrence and iktasabat for repeated acts over time. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting آخرون: Another view treats kasabat and iktasabat as two forms with the same meaning, as in 86:17. QURTUBI-FULL: The verb kasaba is repeated with different morphology to suit the pleasing pattern of the speech. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن عطية: Ibn ʿAṭiyya says the verb is repeated in different forms simply to vary the style, as in the pairing of مهل and أمهل. BURHAN: The extra syllable in اكتسبت suits the burden and effort of sin, contrasting with the lighter form كسبت for good. BIQAI-FULL: The augmented iftiʿāl form for evil signals effortful engagement: sin is recorded only with firm resolve, and a person who intends evil but does not act is not charged. BURSEVI: The verse uses the more effortful form اكتسبت for evil because the desired act involves striving, unlike good; the iftiʿāl form conveys exertion. IBNASHUR-FULL: It is also said that iktasaba denotes effort when paired with kasaba, though the Quran never uses iktasabat for good."}, {"id": "2:286/q07/p2", "position": "The forms contrast the effort associated with good and evil.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: The verse uses the lighter earning verb for good and the effortful form for evil because evil is desired by the soul and pursued more energetically, unlike good. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī explains the added effort in iktisāb for evil by the soul's desire and inclination toward it; good needs no marked effort, so its verb is unaugmented. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abū Ḥayyān instead says good deeds are acquired without strain by following God's command, while sins require effort to cross the boundary of His prohibition, explaining the two verb forms."}, {"id": "2:286/q07/p3", "position": "The two forms vary the wording without a fixed lexical difference.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR reporting ابن عطية: Ibn ʿAṭiyya first suggests the different forms simply vary the wording elegantly, as in 86:17; the author instead sees a semantic distinction in the effort involved in good and evil. SAMIN-DURR reporting أبو البقاء: Abū al-Baqāʾ reports both the view that the forms are synonymous and the view that iftaʿala signals effort, making sin weighty in its consequences."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
