<<chunk 89, part 4 of 0..5>>
shing that He does not impose beyond capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p32", "position": "The prayer seeks continued relief from burdens beyond capacity, so it will not be withdrawn in anger as earlier permitted foods were withheld from the Jews.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The prayer seeks continued relief from burdens beyond capacity, so it will not be withdrawn in anger as earlier permitted foods were withheld from the Jews."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p33", "position": "The verse states God’s customary practice: He does not require belief beyond understanding or obedience beyond human power, in keeping with rational beings’ practice.", "reasons": "TABATABAI: The verse states God’s customary practice: He does not require belief beyond understanding or obedience beyond human power, in keeping with rational beings’ practice."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p34", "position": "It connects forward by distinguishing the petitions about error, forgetfulness, and hardship from obligations beyond capacity.", "reasons": "TABATABAI: It connects forward by distinguishing the petitions about error, forgetfulness, and hardship from obligations beyond capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p35", "position": "Imposed hardship beyond capacity is punishment for rebellion, not a legal duty; error and forgetfulness are involuntary themselves but can arise through voluntary precursors.", "reasons": "TABATABAI: Imposed hardship beyond capacity is punishment for rebellion, not a legal duty; error and forgetfulness are involuntary themselves but can arise through voluntary precursors."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p36", "position": "The author surveys Qur'anic uses of kasaba and iktasaba for deeds and their consequences, including spending from earnings, Abu Lahab's earnings, and inheritance shares.", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ: The author surveys Qur'anic uses of kasaba and iktasaba for deeds and their consequences, including spending from earnings, Abu Lahab's earnings, and inheritance shares."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p37", "position": "God creates humans’ universal will and power, usable for good or evil; their particular willing and power is its direction toward one, resolved act, called kasb, which affects the act’s moral quality rather than.", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting Mâtürîdî mezhebi: God creates humans’ universal will and power, usable for good or evil; their particular willing and power is its direction toward one, resolved act, called kasb, which affects the act’s moral quality rather than its creation, grounding responsibility."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p38", "position": "The Jabriyya deny that people possess a will or power of their own in the acts and behaviors they perform.", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting Cebriyye ekolü: The Jabriyya deny that people possess a will or power of their own in the acts and behaviors they perform."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p39", "position": "The Muʿtazila say human acts independently result from human will and power, and that a person creates their act from nothing.", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting Mu‘tezile mezhebi: The Muʿtazila say human acts independently result from human will and power, and that a person creates their act from nothing."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p40", "position": "The principle that God tasks no soul beyond capacity also appears in 2:233, 6:152, 7:42, and 23:62.", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN: The principle that God tasks no soul beyond capacity also appears in 2:233, 6:152, 7:42, and 23:62."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p41", "position": "Ibn Atiyya compares this assignment to a hadith's command that a sculptor make a hair.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya compares this assignment to a hadith's command that a sculptor make a hair."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p42", "position": "Impossibility may be logical, customary, physically fatal, or due to being occupied with another task; the last is figurative usage.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Impossibility may be logical, customary, physically fatal, or due to being occupied with another task; the last is figurative usage."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p43", "position": "It is possible to impose a task a person cannot fulfill because of absent means, such as faith on someone eternally known not to believe; this verse concerns impossibility in itself.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD: It is possible to impose a task a person cannot fulfill because of absent means, such as faith on someone eternally known not to believe; this verse concerns impossibility in itself."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p44", "position": "Biqāʿī distinguishes actual assignment from what God may command: an act such as sleep, or a possible act known not to occur, is not assigned here even though such a command is conceptually permissible.", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: Biqāʿī distinguishes actual assignment from what God may command: an act such as sleep, or a possible act known not to occur, is not assigned here even though such a command is conceptually permissible."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p45", "position": "He illustrates impossibility with being ordered to hear using sight, occupy more than one place, or be born again to one’s parents; no such act can receive a command of obedience.", "reasons": "TABATABAI: He illustrates impossibility with being ordered to hear using sight, occupy more than one place, or be born again to one’s parents; no such act can receive a command of obedience."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q06", "question": "What do the soul's gains and liabilities include?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q06/p1", "position": "Good deeds and their reward benefit the soul; evil deeds and their liability weigh against it.", "reasons": "TUSTARI: What the soul earns is the reward of its good deeds. TUSTARI: What the soul acquires against itself is the burden of its sins. TAB-FULL reporting الشعبي: Al-Shaʿbi said the discussion reached this point and returned to the end of the verse, namely the assignment of what each soul earned or bore. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari accepts that each soul is liable only for its own earning: liability requires doing what God forbade or leaving what He commanded. TAB-FULL: Each soul receives what it earned in good and bears what it acquired in evil. TAB-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada glosses what a soul earns as good and what it bears as evil or wrongdoing. TAB-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi likewise says the soul’s earnings are its good deeds and its burdens are its evil deeds. TAB-FULL reporting عبد الله بن عباس: Ibn Abbas identifies the soul’s earnings and burdens as the deeds of hand, foot, and tongue. TAB-FULL: Forgetting caused by inability to retain what one sincerely tried to learn is not a sin, so seeking forgiveness for it has no point. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās explains what the soul earned as deeds it performed. IBNABIHATIM reporting محمد بن كعب القرظي: Muḥammad b. Kaʿb glosses what the soul earns for itself as good deeds. THALABI: Good deeds belong to the soul with their reward, while its evil deeds and their burden are against it. MAWARDI-FULL: What a person earns is good deeds, while what is against them is sins. QUSHAYRI: The soul receives what it earns of good deeds. QUSHAYRI: What the soul acquires of evil lies against it, and repentance rescues it from that burden. WAHIDI-BASIT: Each person is accountable for their own earnings and is not punished for another person's sin. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: What one earns is obedience; what one bears is sin, and nobody is charged with another's sin. JISHUMI: Each soul receives the reward for what it has earned through good and righteous deeds. BAGHAWI-FULL: What a person earns of good is for that person as reward and recompense. BAGHAWI-FULL: What a person acquires of evil is against that person, carrying its burden. KASHSHAF-FULL: Good deeds benefit the soul and evil deeds harm it; no one bears another’s sin or receives reward for another’s obedience. KASHSHAF-FULL: The intensified form for evil signals effort: the soul desires and is drawn toward evil, so works harder to acquire it; good uses the unmarked form. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting السدي وجماعة من المفسرين: Al-Suddi and other exegetes say what one earns for oneself is good deeds and what lies against one is bad deeds; thoughts are not acquired. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Good deeds follow God's path without strain, while sins require the effort of crossing His prohibition; Ibn Atiyya prefers this as the reason for differing forms. TABRISI: A person receives the reward of obedience and bears the consequence of sins; both may be called earnings because they result from one's acts. TABRISI reporting عبد الله بن مسعود: Ibn Masʿūd says that when a man learned Sūrat al-Baqara, he became earnest and respected among the community. RAZI-FULL reporting صاحب الكشاف: Al-Kashshāf says good is called kasb and evil iktisāb because evil is desired by the commanding soul, which works harder to acquire it, whereas the good term does not imply such exertion. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report says each person has a stronger claim to their earnings than their parents, children, or other people; al-Razi gives no grading. QURTUBI-FULL: Passing thoughts and similar things are not a person’s acquired deeds. QURTUBI-FULL reporting السدي وجماعة المفسرين: Al-Suddi and, according to Ibn Atiyya, the exegetes agree that what a person earns for themselves is good deeds and what is against them is evil deeds. QURTUBI-FULL: Good deeds accrue to a person and evil deeds count against them. BAYDAWI-FULL: A soul receives the good it has earned, while bearing the evil it has acquired; neither another’s obedience nor disobedience benefits or harms it. NASAFI-FULL: Mercy may mean making the scales of our deeds heavy despite our having no good deeds to offer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting السدي، وجماعة المفسرين: Al-Suddī and the commentators unanimously gloss what a soul gains as good deeds and what it acquires as si
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
