<<chunk 89, part 2 of 0..5>>
"position": "The doubled form here serves only to make the verb take a second object, not to intensify or multiply the action.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: The doubled form here serves only to make the verb take a second object, not to intensify or multiply the action."}, {"id": "2:286/q04/p13", "position": "Kesb can mean causing someone to gain and take two objects; in that sense iktisāb is the corresponding acquisition, gaining through another's action.", "reasons": "ELMALILI: Kesb can mean causing someone to gain and take two objects; in that sense iktisāb is the corresponding acquisition, gaining through another's action."}, {"id": "2:286/q04/p14", "position": "Taklīf means laying a burden upon the will; every burden requires enabling power, and the duty must not strain that power.", "reasons": "ELMALILI: Taklīf means laying a burden upon the will; every burden requires enabling power, and the duty must not strain that power."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q05", "question": "Can God impose an impossible duty?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q05/p1", "position": "An impossible duty is rationally possible, and some argue it has occurred.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Imposing what is absolutely beyond capacity is impossible; if the phrase means burdensome, God may do as He wills. THALABI reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjaj says burdening beyond ability is impossible if it means beyond one's capacity, but possible if it means what feels heavy; Israel's commanded self-killing was burdensome in the latter sense. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Those denying rational possibility of impossible duties read the verse as saying God neither does nor has imposed one; Ibn Atiyya says this is not explicit. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting أبو الحسن الأشعري وجماعة من المتكلمين: Al-Ashari and other theologians hold that imposing an impossible duty is rationally possible, not religiously forbidden, and signals certain punishment. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting فرقة: One group says impossible duty occurred in Abu Lahab's case: he was foretold as doomed to disbelief while commanded to believe. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الطبري والزجاج: Al-Tabari and al-Zajjaj deny impossible duties: forgetting means omitted duties, error intentional disobedience, and the burden Israelite obligations and punishments. RAZI-FULL reporting المعتزلة: Their second premise is that ability precedes the act; otherwise an unbeliever commanded to believe would not be able to do so, making the command impossible. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: Al-Rāzī's Ashʿarite colleagues say rational proofs establish that impossible commands do occur, so this verse must be interpreted. RAZI-FULL: The second argument says acts depend on motives created by God; if motives instead came from the person, an infinite regress follows, while a determining motive makes the alternative impossible, yet the unbeliever is commanded to believe. RAZI-FULL: The third argument says a command issued when motives are equal requires contradictory equality and preference; if one motive prevails, the preferred is necessary and the other impossible. RAZI-FULL: The fifth argument says people do not know the detailed count of movements and rests in an act such as moving a finger; since they did not intend that precise count, they do not create it, and an undetermined preference is impossible. RAZI-FULL: A second answer defines command as notice that action brings reward and omission brings punishment; where an act is impossible, the statement is not a real command but notice of punishment and one's creation for Hell. RAZI-FULL: Punishing a forgetful person is not rationally impossible: fear of later punishment can sustain memory, though constant vigilance is difficult, making a request for pardon fitting. QURTUBI-FULL reporting أبو الحسن الأشعري وجماعة من المتكلمين: Al-Ashari and a group of theologians hold that imposing the impossible is rationally possible, as a sign that the person will be punished, without compromising doctrine. QURTUBI-FULL: The scholars agree that impossible obligations do not occur in revealed law, and this verse signals their absence. QURTUBI-FULL reporting فرقة: One group says the impossible occurred in Abu Lahab’s case: he was commanded to accept a whole law that included the prediction he would never believe. QURTUBI-FULL reporting فرقة: Another group says impossible obligation never occurred; a consensus is reported on this position. BAYDAWI-FULL: The plea concerns tribulation and punishment, or duties beyond human capacity; its wording indicates that imposing an impossible duty is possible, since the prayer seeks escape from it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The verse resolves the believers' concern over thoughts in 2:284 and establishes that impossible demands are not legally imposed; he compares it with God's wish for ease in 2:185. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Some infer from this verse that God may impose a duty beyond human capacity. BIQAI-FULL: The supplications proceed from lighter requests to heavier ones, teaching that God did not punish forgetfulness or error, impose burdens, demand the impossible, or withhold pardon and mercy. BURSEVI: This shows that God has not actually imposed an impossible burden, not that such imposition is intrinsically impossible: its occurrence would make God's statement false, while an unrestricted negation does not establish impossibility. ALUSI-FULL: On either gloss of wusʿ, the verse shows that impossible burdens do not actually occur, but it does not prove that such imposition is logically impossible. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: Another view makes the request broader than the preceding one: the burden is pictured as impossible to bear for emphasis. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: A further view treats this as asking to avoid literally impossible obligations and argues that the request proves such obligations are possible; Al-Alusi judges the argument weak. TABATABAI: God may prevent wrongdoing by blocking its means or requiring precaution; burdens imposed as punishment for a person's prior bad choice are not intrinsically impossible obligations. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Against theologians who deem an impossible divine burden permissible to protect unrestricted power and will, the author reads the verse as confirming that a wise God does not impose what exceeds capacity, in keeping with justice and a rational basis for accountability."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p2", "position": "An intrinsically impossible duty cannot be imposed.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: In ordinary speech, saying one cannot bear speaking with someone means it is burdensome, not literally impossible. TABRISI: The verse disproves the Mujabbira's allowance of obligations beyond ability: capacity lies within human power, beyond which effort is exhausted. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The verse means God does not impose what a person cannot do, since that would be impossible, like requiring a paralytic to run or a blind person to see. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The prayer later in the verse asks not to be burdened with what cannot be borne; if impossible obligations could never be imposed, that request would be pointless. RAZI-FULL reporting المعتزلة: The Muʿtazila cite this verse and 22:78, 4:28, and the promise of ease to argue that God does not impose what a person cannot do. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: They argue that a genuinely impossible act cannot be requested in supplication, like combining opposites or making the eternal originated; abandoning this rule in particular cases needs specific evidence. RAZI-FULL: A difficult burden can be carried or imposed, while what is beyond capacity cannot be carried at all; therefore the verse uses “impose” for the impossible and both verbs for hardship. BAYDAWI-FULL: This supports the nonoccurrence of an impossible duty, but does not prove that such a duty is impossible in principle; compare 2:185. BURSEVI reporting التيسير: The request means not to impose duties that are difficult to sustain continually; it does not ask for the literally impossible, which cannot occur. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: An objection says the easier-than-capacity gloss concerns this community alone and so cannot establish a universal rule against impossible burdens; Al-Alusi says the verse in any case does not prove their impossibility. ALUSI-FULL reporting المحققين من أهل السنة والمعتزلة: An objection says the third view conflicts with the rational impossibility of charging beyond capacity accepted by leading Sunnis and Muʿtazilites, since exemption would not then be a continuing favor. TABATABAI: The plea concerns punishment for sins—unbearably hard duties, inflicted torment, or a scourge such as transformation—not an initial impossible duty, which reason excludes."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p3", "position": "Al-Ḥasan applies the verse to an unpayable vow: a person is not charged beyond capacity.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM reporting الحسن: Al-Ḥasan applies the verse to an unpayable vow: a person is not charged beyond capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p4", "position": "The plea not to be burdened with what is beyond capacity can mean not to be loaded with what is heavy and difficult, even if people are capable of bearing it.", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA: The plea not to be burdened with what is beyond capacity can mean not to be loaded with what is heavy and difficult, even if people are capable of bearing it."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p5", "position": "The Qadari objection is that if God decrees someone's disbelief yet commands faith, He has burdened that person with what is beyond his capacity.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT reporting القدرية: The Qadari objection is that if God decrees someone's disbelief yet commands faith, He has burdened that person with what is beyond his capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q05/p6", "position": "The request not to be held accountable refutes determinism about human acts, since the request presupposes that people act.", "reasons": "JISHUMI: The request not to be held accountabl
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
