<<chunk 90, part 3 of 0..5>>
cribed as a load because those duties lead to it. BURSEVI reporting التيسير: The two requests are not repetitive: pardon leaves the person unpunished and erases the sin, while forgiveness hides it from view; one may pardon while still mentioning and exposing a deed. ALUSI-FULL reporting مفتي الديار الرومية: The fresh statement encourages observance and warns against neglect: each person's benefit from obedience and harm from disobedience return to that person, not to God. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: One view takes forgetting as abandoning obligations and error as committing prohibitions, even deliberately, since sins are errors opposed to correctness. IBNASHUR-FULL: The closing pleas omit another ربنا because it has already been repeated three times, and Arabs avoid repeating a word more than three times except for emphasis or alarm. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting مرة بن عداء الفقعسي: Ibn Ashur cites Murra ibn Adāʾ al-Faqʿasi's poem lamenting patrons who abandon their client as the days turn."}, {"id": "2:286/q14/p3", "position": "The plea concerns culpable negligence that causes forgetting.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Because this follows prayers for pardon over forgetfulness, error, and an unbearable covenant, Ṭabarī says the request for ease in religious duties best fits the context. JISHUMI reporting الأصم: Al-Asamm reads “if we forget” as ordinary absent-minded forgetfulness; the author rejects this because accidental forgetfulness is not charged or punishable. KASHSHAF-FULL: Because the God-fearing only lapse through forgetfulness or error, naming these in prayer disavows culpable causes and acknowledges their protection. KASHSHAF-FULL: Although forgetfulness and error are excused, they are named to mean the negligence and inattention that can cause them. TABRISI: A second reading asks pardon if people expose themselves to circumstances that cause forgetfulness or error about a command or duty. BAYDAWI-FULL: The prayer may ask pardon for negligence that caused forgetting or error, or for forgetting and error themselves; they do not rationally preclude accountability, like mistakenly taking poison can still cause death. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Zamakhshari permits taking forgetting and error literally as excused lapses, and also reads them as negligence and inattention that caused the lapse; God’s faithful servants seek continued protection from such lapses. BURSEVI: The plea seeks pardon for negligence and carelessness that lead to forgetfulness or error, since such causes fall within human responsibility. BURSEVI: The request implies that accountability for forgetfulness and error is possible because avoiding them is possible in some measure; otherwise the prayer would be meaningless. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: A second view means the prior negligence and inattention that usually cause forgetting or mistakes, and asks pardon for that antecedent shortcoming. ELMALILI: Forgetfulness and error fall into two kinds: some may excuse the person, while others do not, because a person can be responsible for failing to take reasonable precautions. ELMALILI: Someone who notices impurity on clothing but delays removing it and later forgets before praying is not excused, because the initial delay was negligent; someone who never noticed it is excused. ELMALILI: Some legal duties remain in error cases such as accidental killing, and forgetfulness or error does not remove compensation for harm to other people; the plea seeks freedom from punishment, not freedom from obligation, including for causes and consequences. TABATABAI: Because these three pleas follow the request not to be charged for forgetting or error, they concern sins arising from forgetfulness, error, and similar failings. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting hadis: A hadith cited above gives glad tidings that God forgives the Muslim community’s lapses caused by forgetting or error, affirming that this supplication was accepted."}, {"id": "2:286/q14/p4", "position": "Forgetting may be literal, but failure to take precautions can be culpable.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report says the Prophet tied a thread around his finger when he wanted to remember a need; al-Razi uses it to show deliberate memory precautions."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q15", "question": "What does أَخْطَأْنَا mean here?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q15/p1", "position": "Error includes failing to do the right act.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report from the Prophet says God has excused this community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and what its members are compelled to do; no grading is given. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari reads the anonymous poet’s خطئوا الصواب as meaning that they missed the right answer, illustrating his distinction between خطئ and أخطأ. TAB-FULL reporting قوم: Some held that asking not to be charged for forgetfulness or error is obedience and humility, not an actual request for pardon; al-Tabari says he will treat their view in a fuller work. TAB-FULL: Because this follows prayers for pardon over forgetfulness, error, and an unbearable covenant, Ṭabarī says the request for ease in religious duties best fits the context. ZAJJAJ reporting قيل: An alternative gloss takes if we forget as if we omit, and or err as committing a sin. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās explains the liability clause as referring to what a person has done. IBNABIHATIM reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet says God has waived three things for his community: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. FARISI-HUJJA reporting النبي: A transmitted Prophetic report says the community is absolved for error, forgetfulness, and what it is compelled to do; the author gives no grading. THALABI reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd applies forgetting to neglecting a required duty and error to doing something forbidden. THALABI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying that error, forgetfulness, and what people are coerced into have been lifted from his community. THALABI reporting النظام: Al-Nazzam imagines separation as so terrible that it could shake mountains, and says punishment by separation would seem worse than the fire's heat. MAWARDI-FULL: Linguists distinguish akhta'a, which can apply to sinful or non-sinful error, from khati'a, which always entails sin; a cited verse of poetry illustrates the distinction. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: To err means to miss what is correct. JISHUMI: Akhaṭaʾa can refer to sin or something other than sin, while khaṭiʾa is used only for sin. JISHUMI: “Or we err” may mean committing a sin because of an ambiguity. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said that error, forgetfulness, and coercion have been lifted from his community. KASHSHAF-FULL: Because the God-fearing only lapse through forgetfulness or error, naming these in prayer disavows culpable causes and acknowledges their protection. KASHSHAF-FULL: The prayer asks that they not be taken to task for forgetfulness or error if either occurs through them. KASHSHAF-FULL: Although forgetfulness and error are excused, they are named to mean the negligence and inattention that can cause them. KASHSHAF-FULL: An unnamed authority disliked one way of referring to the sūra and said one should call it the sūra in which al-Baqara is mentioned. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting النبي: Qatada says he was told the Prophet stated that God excused his community for forgetfulness and error. TABRISI reporting أبو عبيدة: Abū ʿUbayda says akhṭaʾa and khaṭiʾa are both Arabic forms, but the former can be sinful or non-sinful error while the latter means sin alone. TABRISI: An unnamed poet uses khaṭiʾū for sinning against what is right, witnessing the sin-specific sense of khaṭiʾa. TABRISI: A second reading asks pardon if people expose themselves to circumstances that cause forgetfulness or error about a command or duty. TABRISI: The prayer asks God to pardon sins, cover errors, and show mercy through blessing in this world, pardon in the next, and admission to Paradise. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Linguistically, error is an act that occurs contrary to the actor’s intention. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report says error, forgetfulness, and coercion have been lifted from the community; al-Razi gives no grading. RAZI-FULL: At the close of his tafsir, Razi says he wrote seeking God's pleasure, asks acceptance for what is correct, and pardon for any error. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النبي: The Prophet said he was granted victory through terror cast over enemies as far as a month’s journey. QURTUBI-FULL: The prayer asks that sin committed through forgetfulness or error be pardoned, as in the Prophetic report that these are lifted from the community. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النبي: The Prophet said that error, forgetfulness, and what people are coerced into have been lifted from his community; the author says this certainly lifts sin, while legal effects differ by case. BAYDAWI-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet’s saying that error and forgetfulness have been lifted from his community supports the promised pardon. NASAFI-FULL: Some disapproved of saying «I read al-Baqara» and preferred «I read the sūra in which al-Baqara is mentioned». ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قطرب، والطبري: Quṭrub and al-Ṭabarī gloss نسينا as “we left/omitted”; the source then begins their gloss of وأخطأنا. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Forgetting is absence of recollection, and forgetfulness and error are excused from accountability. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari glosses the wording about error as “we intended,” while Qutrub says it means we missed the correct interpretation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Zamakhshari permits taking forgetting and error literally as excused lapses, and also reads them as negligence and inattention that caused the lapse; God’s faithful servan
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
