<<chunk 90, part 4 of 0..5>>
ts seek continued protection from such lapses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya says many scholars correctly understand the prayer as asking pardon for prevailing forgetfulness and error from the intended course. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada reports that the Prophet said God has pardoned his community for forgetfulness and error. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: God commands believers to ask not to be punished for sins committed in forgetfulness or error; this command supports that He grants what they request. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting أم الدرداء: Ibn Abi Hatim transmits from Umm al-Darda that the Prophet said God overlooks three for his community: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: A Prophetic report transmitted through Ibn Abbas says God lifted mistake, forgetfulness, and coercion from the community; Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban narrate it, but Ahmad and Abu Hatim faulted it. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī connects the closing assurance to the believers’ request for the straight path: the sura describes its followers, Jews as those under wrath, and Christians as astray, warning seekers to avoid their errors and submit to God. BIQAI-FULL: They ask God not to treat them like an adversary interrogating a litigant over every small and large matter. BIQAI-FULL: Forgetting means doing what was forbidden without remembering; error means doing it while remembering but without intending evil. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī defines error as an unintended departure from the proper limit despite intending or wishing to be right. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عمر: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting عقبة بن عامر: The Prophet said God has lifted from his community mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting أبو ذر: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting ثوبان: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting أبو بكرة: The Prophet said God lifted from this community mistakes, forgetfulness, and things they are forced to do. DURR-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan transmits from the Prophet that this community is excused for errors, forgetfulness, and compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting الشعبي: Al-Shaʿbi attributes to the Prophet the report that God pardons three things: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. DURR-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan reports that God excuses a person for what he errs in, forgets, is compelled to do, or is overcome by. BURSEVI: The plea seeks pardon for negligence and carelessness that lead to forgetfulness or error, since such causes fall within human responsibility. BURSEVI: The request implies that accountability for forgetfulness and error is possible because avoiding them is possible in some measure; otherwise the prayer would be meaningless. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: Another alternative places pardon at death, forgiveness in the darkness of graves, and mercy amid the terrors of resurrection. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: A second view means the prior negligence and inattention that usually cause forgetting or mistakes, and asks pardon for that antecedent shortcoming. ALUSI-FULL reporting الطبراني: Al-Tabarani transmits a hadith that al-Nawawi grades ḥasan: the Prophet says his community is exempted for error, forgetfulness, and coercion. ELMALILI: Forgetfulness and error fall into two kinds: some may excuse the person, while others do not, because a person can be responsible for failing to take reasonable precautions. ELMALILI: Involuntary error does not change the intrinsic harm or unlawfulness of the resulting act, just as swallowed poison remains harmful or an accidental fall into a well remains dangerous; people must avoid such outcomes as far as possible. ELMALILI: Some legal duties remain in error cases such as accidental killing, and forgetfulness or error does not remove compensation for harm to other people; the plea seeks freedom from punishment, not freedom from obligation, including for causes and consequences. ELMALILI reporting رسول الله: Elmalılı relates the plea to the Prophetic hadith, “My community’s error and forgetfulness are lifted,” while preserving liability for harm to others. IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn Ashur's preferred reading takes the assurance as God's own parenthetical speech among the believers' quoted words, displaying the fruit of faith and obedience and promising no undue religious hardship. IBNASHUR-FULL: Forgetfulness and error mean the resulting deed or omission that God does not approve. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting النبي: A report recorded by Ibn Majah says error, forgetfulness, and compulsion were lifted from the Prophet's community; it also circulates with وضع, al-Nawawi graded it hasan, and Ahmad rejected it. IBNASHUR-FULL: The report's meaning is sound for exemption from religious address, but liability for destruction and compensation remains; therefore the prayer can still ask not to be punished for an error. TABATABAI: Although the Prophet is protected from error and forgetfulness, he relies on God's protection and may ask for what he cannot secure from himself, joining the community of believers. TABATABAI: Because these three pleas follow the request not to be charged for forgetting or error, they concern sins arising from forgetfulness, error, and similar failings. TABATABAI: The requested forgiveness is specific to sin through error or forgetfulness, unlike the absolute “Your forgiveness, our Lord” answering the believers' absolute assent; the requests are not redundant. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting hadis: A hadith cited above gives glad tidings that God forgives the Muslim community’s lapses caused by forgetting or error, affirming that this supplication was accepted. STUDYQURAN: Moses’ plea about forgetting recalls the believers’ prayer in 2:286 not to be taken to task for forgetting or error. STUDYQURAN reporting IK: Forgetting or erring may include omissions such as missing canonical prayers and commission such as adultery. STUDYQURAN reporting the Prophet: A hadith says God absolved the Prophet's community of mistakes, forgetfulness, and acts done under compulsion."}, {"id": "2:286/q15/p2", "position": "Error includes deliberate wrongdoing.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari says the intentional kind of error is a chosen violation for which one may ask pardon, apart from unbelief. TAB-FULL: An unintentional mistake based on a reasonable but mistaken assumption carries no sin: examples are eating at night believing dawn has not arrived or delaying prayer on a cloudy day while awaiting its time. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari distinguishes intentional wrongdoing, which is sinful and calls for pardon except in unbelief, from an innocent mistake. FARISI-HUJJA: نسينا may mean ordinary forgetfulness and أخطأنا an unintentional mistake; the prayer asks not to be punished for either, although believers know God does not punish them for these. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Some take أخطأنا as deliberate intention, using خطيء for someone who sins intentionally; a line by Umayya ibn Abi al-Salt illustrates the usage. THALABI reporting الزهري: Al-Zuhri reports that Umar corrected a man’s prayer for forgiveness of his errors, saying errors are forgiven and he should ask forgiveness for deliberate acts. MAWARDI-FULL: Mistakes may mean sins interpreted under ambiguities or sins deliberately committed despite being wrong. WAHIDI-BASIT: The correct linguistic distinction is خطئ for intentional sin and أخطأ for failing to hit the right answer; Abu al-Haytham likewise distinguishes deliberate from accidental acts. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting أبو عبيدة: Abu Ubayda treats أخطأ and خطئ as two forms of one word, citing poetry; on this reading the verse asks pardon for deliberate sin. DAMGHANI: Akhaṭaʾnā means making an unintentional mistake. JISHUMI reporting الأصم: Al-Asamm takes error to mean an unintentional act. JISHUMI: The author rejects the claim that this prayer is invalid because unintentional error is excused: it remains proper to pray even for what is already waived. BAGHAWI-FULL: One view says the word for erring can mean acting deliberately, supported by its use for a grave intentional act elsewhere. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting الأكثرون: Most interpreters take error as ignorance or inadvertence: deliberate sin is not simply absolved, but left to God’s will, whereas error is forgiven. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الطبري وغيره: Al-Tabari and others take forgetting as neglecting obedience and error as intentional sin; involuntary forgetfulness and error are already excused. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Many scholars, including Ibn Atiyya, hold that the prayer concerns involuntary forgetfulness and unintentional error; he calls this correct. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Akhṭa'a can describe intentional action as well as genuine mistake or deliberated action. TABRISI: One interpretation takes forgetting as abandoning obedience and error as committing sins, even deliberately; the prayer seeks forgiveness for neglected duties and wrongful acts. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Khaṭaʾ can mean an unintentional mistake. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن الأنباري: Ibn al-Anbari takes forgetting here as deliberate neglect, since involuntary forgetfulness is already exempt from sin; he likewise takes error here as intentional, though the word can also mean inadvertence. RAZI-FULL: If forgetting and error mean intentionally doing wrong, the commanded prayer gives grave sinners grounds to hope for pardon: God instructs believers to ask not to be punished for such sins. QURTUBI-FULL: The account glosses “if we forgot” as ignorance and “or erred” as deliberate action, while also offering the reading o
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
