<<chunk 90, part 1 of 0..5>>
ts believers to say this prayer to God. JISHUMI: The statement may continue the believers’ speech: “We hear and obey; You have burdened us only with what we can bear”; the following prayer is part of their quoted words. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Rabbana la tu'akhidhna means: say this in your supplication. TABRISI: Another reading supplies they say, presenting the words as reported praise and supplication. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: This prayer is God's instruction to people to say these words. SAMIN-DURR: The sentence has no syntactic position, since it gives information; another analysis makes it an accusative supplement to “we hear and obey,” meaning they also said this. ELMALILI: Although the response is separated by a pause, it is phrased as if the believers themselves were voicing it: they would immediately accept and repeat the promised ease because it matches their own hopes. IBNASHUR-FULL: The supplication may be quoted from the believers after their assent in 2:285 as they turn to seek recompense and intimate conversation with God."}, {"id": "2:286/q11/p2", "position": "The assurance is God's own statement; the prayer is taught to believers.", "reasons": "ELMALILI: He lists three parses: everything from “we heard and obeyed” to the surah’s end is governed by “they said”; the assurance in 2:286 is parenthetical within that speech; or an unexpressed “say” introduces the supplications."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q12", "question": "Why is the prayer taught and repeated?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q12/p1", "position": "The taught prayer expresses humility and seeks continued divine favor.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: He recommends memorizing this supplication and praying it often. FARISI-HUJJA: The taught prayer can request an assured divine act, as in the prayers for judgment and fulfillment of promises and the angels' intercession for believers. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya says Muadh's practice may be a Prophetic report, or sound analogy with al-Fatiha because both contain supplication. TABRISI: A third reading means accidentally failing an obligation or unintentionally doing a forbidden act; the plea expresses humility even though such acts are not punished. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report calls supplication the core of worship; al-Razi states no grading. RAZI-FULL reporting المعتزلة: Their third reply is that praying against an act does not establish that God could do it, just as prayers against unjust judgment, disgrace, disobedience, or loss of deeds do not establish those outcomes as possible. RAZI-FULL: The plural prayer seeks fuller acceptance: when people’s spiritual intentions and desires converge on one request, its realization is stronger. QURTUBI-FULL: The prayer’s wording teaches people how to supplicate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Each petition begins Rabbana to invoke God as their nurturer and reformer and to acknowledge their servitude and need; final clauses omit it because they conclude earlier petitions. ITQAN reporting كعب: Ka'b says Muhammad received four verses not given to Moses: the passage beginning لله ما في السماوات and ending al-Baqara, plus Ayat al-Kursi; Moses instead received a supplication. ITQAN: The end of al-Baqara closes with supplication. ALUSI-FULL: The passage resumes the believers' supplications after explaining the wisdom of obligation; it may also complete the narration of their utterances. ELMALILI: Elmalılı closes by praying that God grant worshippers a great share of the promised response when they understand these supplications and follow what they require. IBNASHUR-FULL: Repeating the address to God between coordinated clauses, though unnecessary, displays humility and supplication."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q13", "question": "What does تُؤَاخِذْنَا mean and why this form?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q13/p1", "position": "The plea asks God not to punish or call the speakers to account.", "reasons": "THALABI: تؤاخذنا means ‘do not punish us.’ WAHIDI-BASIT: La tuʾakhidhna means do not punish us. RAZI-FULL: “Do not take us to account” means “do not punish us.” RAZI-FULL: One explanation for the reciprocal form is that the forgetful person exposed himself to harm through his own action, making the punisher seem to assist in harming him. ALUSI-FULL: Muʾākhadha means punishment; the form fāʿala can carry the simple sense of fāʿala/afaʿala rather than reciprocal action. IBNASHUR-FULL: Muakhadha derives from taking in the sense of punishment, and the reciprocal form intensifies the plea not to punish for forgetfulness or error."}, {"id": "2:286/q13/p2", "position": "The reciprocal form pictures the sinner as contributing to his own punishment.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting أهل المعاني: Although the verb is in a reciprocal form, it describes one actor: the sinner has effectively opened a way for the punisher and thus shares in the taking to account. WAHIDI-BASIT: The reciprocal verb is used though punishment has one agent: the sinner exposes himself and opens the way through his own deed, as if helping the punisher seize him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another explanation retains the reciprocal form because the sinner makes himself vulnerable to punishment through his deed, as though aiding his own injury. SAMIN-DURR: The reciprocal form is used for one action because the sinner exposes himself to punishment by his deed, as if helping the punisher act against him; it may also be a conventional reciprocal such as sāfartu. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: An alternative takes the reciprocal form literally: God holds the sinner accountable while the sinner, having no rescuer but God, appeals to Him as though demanding release; Al-Alusi calls this unsound without strained interpretation."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q14", "question": "What does نَّسِينَا mean here?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q14/p1", "position": "Forgetting is literal absence of recollection.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report from the Prophet says God has excused this community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and what its members are compelled to do; no grading is given. ABDURRAZZAQ reporting قتادة: Qatāda says he was told that God has excused this community for forgetfulness and for thoughts that arise within them. TAB-FULL reporting قوم: Some held that asking not to be charged for forgetfulness or error is obedience and humility, not an actual request for pardon; al-Tabari says he will treat their view in a fuller work. TAB-FULL: The petition asks pardon for forgetting a required duty or mistakenly doing something forbidden without intending disobedience, through ignorance or error. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd paraphrases the prayer as asking not to be charged for forgetting a duty or mistakenly committing a prohibition. TAB-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Qatada relays the Prophet’s statement that God has excused this community for forgetfulness and for thoughts that occur within themselves. ZAJJAJ reporting النبي: A prophetic report says this community is pardoned for forgetfulness and inward thoughts. IBNABIHATIM reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet says God has waived three things for his community: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. FARISI-HUJJA: نسينا may mean ordinary forgetfulness and أخطأنا an unintentional mistake; the prayer asks not to be punished for either, although believers know God does not punish them for these. FARISI-HUJJA reporting النبي: A transmitted Prophetic report says the community is absolved for error, forgetfulness, and what it is compelled to do; the author gives no grading. THALABI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying that error, forgetfulness, and what people are coerced into have been lifted from his community. WAHIDI-BASIT: Even when religious law excuses forgetfulness, believers may still be taught to pray for pardon, as prophets and angels petition for things God will certainly grant. JISHUMI: The phrase may also ask God not to hold them accountable if they are exposed to forgetfulness. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said that error, forgetfulness, and coercion have been lifted from his community. KASHSHAF-FULL: The prayer asks that they not be taken to task for forgetfulness or error if either occurs through them. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Many scholars, including Ibn Atiyya, hold that the prayer concerns involuntary forgetfulness and unintentional error; he calls this correct. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting النبي: Qatada says he was told the Prophet stated that God excused his community for forgetfulness and error. RAZI-FULL: The first of two interpretations takes forgetfulness in its ordinary sense, as the opposite of remembering. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report says error, forgetfulness, and coercion have been lifted from the community; al-Razi gives no grading. RAZI-FULL: If forgetting and error mean intentionally doing wrong, the commanded prayer gives grave sinners grounds to hope for pardon: God instructs believers to ask not to be punished for such sins. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: Al-Razi’s Ashʿari associates argue that the verse supports the rational possibility of obligating what cannot be done: a forgetful person cannot avoid the act, yet asks God not to punish him for it. QURTUBI-FULL: The prayer asks that sin committed through forgetfulness or error be pardoned, as in the Prophetic report that these are lifted from the community. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النبي: The Prophet said that error, forgetfulness, and what people are coerced into have been lifted from his community; the author says this certainly lifts sin, while legal effects differ by case. QURTUBI-FULL: The account glosses “if we forgot” as ignorance and “or erred” as delibe
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
