<<chunk 90, part 2 of 0..5>>
rate action, while also offering the reading of acting through forgetfulness and error. BAYDAWI-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet’s saying that error and forgetfulness have been lifted from his community supports the promised pardon. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Forgetting is absence of recollection, and forgetfulness and error are excused from accountability. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya says many scholars correctly understand the prayer as asking pardon for prevailing forgetfulness and error from the intended course. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada reports that the Prophet said God has pardoned his community for forgetfulness and error. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: One view finds here forgiveness for major sinners: the prayer would be improper if forgetfulness and error meant only unaccountable acts, so they signify deliberate sin, omission and commission respectively. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: God commands believers to ask not to be punished for sins committed in forgetfulness or error; this command supports that He grants what they request. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting أم الدرداء: Ibn Abi Hatim transmits from Umm al-Darda that the Prophet said God overlooks three for his community: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Forgetfulness can mean leaving an obligation or committing a prohibition unintentionally; error means missing the sound legal form out of ignorance. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: A Prophetic report transmitted through Ibn Abbas says God lifted mistake, forgetfulness, and coercion from the community; Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban narrate it, but Ahmad and Abu Hatim faulted it. BIQAI-FULL: Forgetting means doing what was forbidden without remembering; error means doing it while remembering but without intending evil. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عمر: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting عقبة بن عامر: The Prophet said God has lifted from his community mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting أبو ذر: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting ثوبان: The Prophet said God pardons his community for mistakes, forgetfulness, and actions done under compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting أبو بكرة: The Prophet said God lifted from this community mistakes, forgetfulness, and things they are forced to do. DURR-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan transmits from the Prophet that this community is excused for errors, forgetfulness, and compulsion. DURR-FULL reporting الشعبي: Al-Shaʿbi attributes to the Prophet the report that God pardons three things: error, forgetfulness, and coercion. DURR-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan reports that God excuses a person for what he errs in, forgets, is compelled to do, or is overcome by. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: A third view means actual forgetfulness and error: they could rationally bring punishment, like poison can kill when taken inadvertently, but God promised to overlook them as grace. ALUSI-FULL reporting الطبراني: Al-Tabarani transmits a hadith that al-Nawawi grades ḥasan: the Prophet says his community is exempted for error, forgetfulness, and coercion. ELMALILI reporting رسول الله: Elmalılı relates the plea to the Prophetic hadith, “My community’s error and forgetfulness are lifted,” while preserving liability for harm to others. IBNASHUR-FULL: Forgetfulness and error mean the resulting deed or omission that God does not approve. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting النبي: A report recorded by Ibn Majah says error, forgetfulness, and compulsion were lifted from the Prophet's community; it also circulates with وضع, al-Nawawi graded it hasan, and Ahmad rejected it. TABATABAI: Although the Prophet is protected from error and forgetfulness, he relies on God's protection and may ask for what he cannot secure from himself, joining the community of believers. TABATABAI: The requested forgiveness is specific to sin through error or forgetfulness, unlike the absolute “Your forgiveness, our Lord” answering the believers' absolute assent; the requests are not redundant. STUDYQURAN: Moses’ plea about forgetting recalls the believers’ prayer in 2:286 not to be taken to task for forgetting or error. STUDYQURAN reporting IK: Forgetting or erring may include omissions such as missing canonical prayers and commission such as adultery. STUDYQURAN reporting the Prophet: A hadith says God absolved the Prophet's community of mistakes, forgetfulness, and acts done under compulsion."}, {"id": "2:286/q14/p2", "position": "Forgetting includes abandoning or neglecting an obligation.", "reasons": "TUSTARI: A person recognizes sins by guarding the heart's light and weighing everything allowed to enter or leave it. TUSTARI: A heart occupied with what does not concern it is immediately punished by neglect of what does; only those who know God recognize this. TAB-FULL: Neglectful forgetting is a failure to perform a command; the petition seeks pardon for it, except when the neglect amounts to unbelief. Al-Tabari cites Adam’s lapse and later neglect of prayer, fasting, or memorized Quran. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd says people can obey commands and leave prohibitions only through God’s mercy, and no one is saved except by it. ZAJJAJ reporting قيل: An alternative gloss takes if we forget as if we omit, and or err as committing a sin. FARISI-HUJJA: When نسي means leave, attributing it to God is figurative: people leave obedience and God leaves them without mercy or rescue; the Qurʾan also uses ترك for leaving people alone. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Another view understands forgetting as abandoning or neglecting; al-Tha'labi prefers the literal sense, though he cites 9:67 for the alternative usage. THALABI reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd applies forgetting to neglecting a required duty and error to doing something forbidden. MAWARDI-FULL: Nasiya can mean deliberately neglecting God's command or simply leaving it; Qutrub cites 'they forgot God, so He forgot them' for the latter sense. WAHIDI-BASIT: Here forgetting can mean abandoning an obligation; in 9:67, people abandon God's service and are left without reward. JISHUMI reporting الحسن: Hasan supplies an omitted imperative: “and say, Our Lord.” JISHUMI: Another reading of “we forgot” is that people abandoned something because of doubt or bad interpretation, like the verse saying they forgot God and He forgot them. BAGHAWI-FULL: Another interpretation takes forgetting to mean neglecting or abandoning God, as in the verse saying they forgot God and He forgot them. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الطبري وغيره: Al-Tabari and others take forgetting as neglecting obedience and error as intentional sin; involuntary forgetfulness and error are already excused. TABRISI: One interpretation takes forgetting as abandoning obedience and error as committing sins, even deliberately; the prayer seeks forgiveness for neglected duties and wrongful acts. TABRISI: The author cites 9:67 and 2:44 for nasiya meaning abandonment, and an unnamed poet who uses nāsiyan for leaving off spear thrusts in battle. TABRISI reporting ابن عباس وقتادة ومجاهد والربيع والسدي: One explanation asks God not to impose a duty people cannot carry out or punish them for abandoning or violating it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن الأنباري: Ibn al-Anbari takes forgetting here as deliberate neglect, since involuntary forgetfulness is already exempt from sin; he likewise takes error here as intentional, though the word can also mean inadvertence. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi counts four kinds of supplication: the first three begin with “Our Lord,” while the fourth omits that vocative. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi answers that forgetfulness may be culpable when someone neglects precautions, but excusable when warning signs were absent or the person took reasonable care; he gives examples involving impurity, mistaken shooting, and forgetting memorized Qurʾan. RAZI-FULL: Although neglecting precautions may be culpable, the person is then punished for deliberately failing to take care, not for the lapse itself; the verse therefore still supports hope of pardon for grave sinners. RAZI-FULL: A second sense of forgetfulness is abandonment, supported by Qurʾanic usage at 20:115 and 9:67. RAZI-FULL: On the abandonment reading, error means doing an act on the basis of a mistaken interpretation. RAZI-FULL: The fourth prayer omits “Our Lord” because a call is needed at a distance; its omission signals that persistent entreaty brings the servant near to God. QURTUBI-FULL reporting قيل: A report says sincere raiders who leave home beating drums cast fear among unbelievers for a month, whether or not the enemy knows they have departed; the verses were revealed after the Prophet returned. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Zamakhshari likewise supplies an omitted verb, “we seek Your forgiveness and do not deny You,” making the clause declarative. Against: ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He finds the omitted-relative analysis weak because the deleted relative has no preceding relative to license its omission; Ḥassān's verse has a repeated من as its antecedent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قطرب، والطبري: Quṭrub and al-Ṭabarī gloss نسينا as “we left/omitted”; the source then begins their gloss of وأخطأنا. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Some lapses are culpable when a person neglects precautions, such as forgetting known impurity in clothing after failing to take steps to remember. SAMIN-DURR: Mawlā is a mafʿal from wali/yali; here it is a verbal noun used for an agent, possibly with an omitted “possessor of our guardianship,” and it may also denote place or time. BURSEVI: This asks deliverance from unbearable punishments, after asking to avoid the onerous duties whose neglect could bring them; punishment is des
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
