<<chunk 90, part 5 of 0..5>>
f acting through forgetfulness and error. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting عطاء: ʿAṭāʾ glosses “we forgot” as “we did not know” and “we erred” as “we acted deliberately.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الأصمعي: Al-Asmai distinguishes أخطأ as an unintended mistake from خطئ as deliberate wrongdoing; the cited poem witnesses the latter. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: One view finds here forgiveness for major sinners: the prayer would be improper if forgetfulness and error meant only unaccountable acts, so they signify deliberate sin, omission and commission respectively. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Forgetfulness can mean leaving an obligation or committing a prohibition unintentionally; error means missing the sound legal form out of ignorance. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: One view takes forgetting as abandoning obligations and error as committing prohibitions, even deliberately, since sins are errors opposed to correctness. JISHUMI reporting عطاء: ʿAta interprets the prayer as asking not to be held to account for ignorance or deliberate action. TABRISI reporting ابن عباس وعطاء: Ibn ʿAbbās and ʿAṭāʾ understand it as asking not to be punished for disobedience, whether done in ignorance or deliberately."}, {"id": "2:286/q15/p3", "position": "Error is an unintended or mistaken act.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The petition asks pardon for forgetting a required duty or mistakenly doing something forbidden without intending disobedience, through ignorance or error. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd paraphrases the prayer as asking not to be charged for forgetting a duty or mistakenly committing a prohibition. WAHIDI-BASIT: The supplication for pardon over inadvertent error is also a devotional prayer believers are instructed to make. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: In legal usage, error is committing a prohibited act with the mistaken person’s intent. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi answers that forgetfulness may be culpable when someone neglects precautions, but excusable when warning signs were absent or the person took reasonable care; he gives examples involving impurity, mistaken shooting, and forgetting memorized Qurʾan. RAZI-FULL: On the abandonment reading, error means doing an act on the basis of a mistaken interpretation. BAYDAWI-FULL: The prayer may ask pardon for negligence that caused forgetting or error, or for forgetting and error themselves; they do not rationally preclude accountability, like mistakenly taking poison can still cause death. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: A third view means actual forgetfulness and error: they could rationally bring punishment, like poison can kill when taken inadvertently, but God promised to overlook them as grace. ELMALILI: The idea that God's mercy would be greater if He imposed no duties is mistaken: mercy does not permit harmful desires to go unchecked or withhold obligations that lead to lasting benefit. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA reporting علي بن عبيد الله: ʿAlī ibn ʿUbayd Allāh distinguishes khāṭiʾ, who hits without intending, from mukhṭiʾ, who intends but misses."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q16", "question": "What liability remains for forgetfulness, error, or coercion?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q16/p1", "position": "This community is excused for error, forgetfulness, and coercion.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس، أبو هريرة: In a dialogue, Abū Hurayra asks Ibn ʿAbbās whether adultery and theft are therefore permitted; Ibn ʿAbbās says no, only Israel's special burden was lifted. DURR-FULL reporting الفضيل: Al-Fudayl says an Israelite sinner had to kill himself as repentance, and that this severity was lifted from this community. BURSEVI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet says this community is exempted from liability for error, forgetfulness, and coercion; earlier communities were liable for the first two. ELMALILI: A hunter who shoots without checking whether a person may be present, then hits someone, is not excused because he failed to take the necessary care."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
