<<chunk 91, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:286/q17", "question": "What does إِصْرًا mean?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q17/p1", "position": "Iṣr is a heavy, stringent burden.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Isr means a burden; the supplication asks not to be burdened with obligations as heavy as those imposed on the Israelites. TAB-FULL reporting الربيع: Al-Rabiʿ explains iṣr as the severe restrictions imposed on earlier People of the Book. TAB-FULL reporting مالك: Malik defines iṣr as a weighty or stringent command. ZAJJAJ: The prayer asks not to be tested with a heavy command like Israel's order to kill themselves, or another burdensome trial. IBNABIHATIM reporting الربيع: Al-Rabīʿ explains the iṣr as the severity God imposed on earlier People of the Book. IBNABIHATIM reporting الفضيل: Al-Fuḍayl says an Israelite who sinned was told to repent by killing himself, a burden removed from this community. IBNABIHATIM reporting السدي: Al-Suddī identifies the unbearable burden with the severe restrictions and prohibitions imposed on the Israelites. THALABI reporting بعضهم: One view reads forgetting literally; al-Kalbi explains that Israelites were punished when they forgot or erred, with foods or drinks forbidden in proportion to the offense, and believers were taught to ask for exemption. THALABI reporting خباب: Khabbab recounts that eleven people died during a gathering where Dhu al-Nun al-Misri spoke of divine love and its overpowering effects on lovers. THALABI reporting بعضهم: One interpretation associates the burden with separation and rupture, saying severed bonds can hurt more than physical pain. MAWARDI-FULL reporting مالك، الربيع، النابغة: Malik and al-Rabi interpret isr as a great burden; al-Nabigha's poetry supports the sense of carrying a burden for others. MAWARDI-FULL: The people before them are the Israelites, who were charged with killing themselves. MAWARDI-FULL: One view takes the unbearable burden as obligations imposed on the Israelites. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting الكلبي: Al-Kalbi says Israelites were punished immediately when they forgot, so believers ask God not to hold them accountable for forgetfulness. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting الكلبي: If أخطأنا means an inadvertent slip, it shares the two explanations given for forgetfulness, including Al-Kalbi's account of immediate punishment for Israelites. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Isr means a burden; they ask not to be given a heavy command like those imposed on the Israelites. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The burdensome commands imposed on those before include the loads prescribed for the Israelites. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: This is taught supplication asking not to be punished for forgetfulness; Israelites faced immediate punishment when forgetting a prescription. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The Israelites faced immediate punishment when they forgot a prescription, so the Prophet and believers were taught to ask not to be held accountable for this. JISHUMI reporting عطاء وعمر ومالك: An alternative takes isr as a heavy burden, asking that commands not be made too strict. JISHUMI reporting قتادة والضحاك والسدي وابن زيد: They interpret this as burdensome commands, such as the Israelites’ order to kill themselves; “I cannot bear speaking to him” means the speech is burdensome. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting الكلبي: Al-Kalbi reads forgetfulness as actual forgetting: Israelites who forgot or erred were punished at once, sometimes by losing foods; believers were taught to ask for no such reckoning. KASHSHAF-FULL: Iṣr is a heavy load that pins its bearer in place; metaphorically it means onerous obligations such as killing oneself or cutting away contaminated skin or clothing. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting مالك: Malik defines isr as a weighty, difficult matter. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi identifies the unbearable burden as prohibitions and fetters imposed on the Israelites. TABRISI reporting النابغة: Al-Nābigha's poetry uses iṣr for the burden of protecting one's people from oppression. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: A maʾṣar is where a watcher stops a passing animal to collect a toll; aṣartu-hu means I detained it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن قتيبة: Another interpretation is a burden: a request not to impose the heavy obligations imposed on the Children of Israel. RAZI-FULL reporting النابغة: Al-Nabigha’s verse uses isr for a burden borne to shield a tribe from oppression, evidencing the word’s sense of weight and hardship. QURTUBI-FULL reporting مالك والربيع: Malik and al-Rabiʿ define iṣr as a severe, difficult command. QURTUBI-FULL reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿid ibn Jubayr says iṣr is hard labor and the burdens placed on the Israelites, such as rules about urine. QURTUBI-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak interprets iṣr as weighty, stringent obligations, close to Malik and al-Rabiʿ’s view. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النابغة: Al-Nabigha’s line about bearing the iṣr for people is cited as poetic evidence for the sense of a burden. QURTUBI-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi interprets the unbearable burden as the severity and shackles imposed on the Israelites. QURTUBI-FULL: The Miʿraj account glosses iṣr as a burden: earlier peoples had wholesome things forbidden for wrongdoing, sins written on their doors, and fifty prayers imposed before relief. BAYDAWI-FULL: An iṣr is a heavy burden that restrains its bearer in place; here it means difficult obligations. BAYDAWI-FULL: The comparison may mean a burden like the one imposed on us, like that imposed on earlier people, or describe the iṣr itself. NASAFI-FULL: Isr is a heavy load that pins its bearer in place; metaphorically it denotes hard obligations such as killing oneself or cutting impurity from skin or clothing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قتادة: A report from Qatada interprets isr as the hastening of punishment. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjaj takes isr as a trial that tests people, like killing and wounding among the Israelites or making a silver ceiling for a disbeliever. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting مالك: Malik glosses isr as a severe, difficult command. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ثعلب: Thalab transmits the gloss that isr means sin. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another gloss takes isr to mean an obligation whose performance is difficult. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi identifies the burden imposed on earlier people as Israel’s restrictive prohibitions and heavy restraints. SAMIN-DURR reporting أبي: Ubayy reads rabbanā wa-lā tuḥammil ʿalaynā iṣran with a doubled mīm; al-Zamakhsharī explains this as intensifying “lay a burden upon.” SAMIN-DURR reporting النابغة: Iṣr fundamentally means weight or severity; al-Nābigha's verse calls it a burden borne after the people have been exhausted. SAMIN-DURR: The noun iṣr is also transmitted with ḍamma on its hamza in a rare reading. BIQAI-FULL: Biqāʿī traces iṣr to a root meaning to bend or incline; a heavy branch bends under its weight, explaining the word’s sense of burden. DURR-FULL reporting الربيع: Al-Rabiʿ explains isr as the severe burden imposed on the People of the Book. DURR-FULL reporting عبد الرحمن بن حسنة: The Prophet reports that Israelites cut away urine with scissors when it touched them, illustrating a former legal hardship. DURR-FULL reporting أبو موسى: Abu Musa says Israelites used shears to cut away the place touched by urine. ALUSI-FULL: Iṣr is a weighty burden that confines its bearer; here it means difficult obligations. ALUSI-FULL: The comparison is either an adjective of an omitted verbal noun, meaning a burden like the one imposed earlier, or an adjective of iṣr itself. ELMALILI: Actions can be broader than divine legislation: oppressive conditions may come as discipline through tyrants such as Pharaoh acting against God’s law. The verb “load” allows for this, and the surah’s Israelite stories have signaled both sources of hardship. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting الزجاج، الزمخشري: Al-Zajjaj and al-Zamakhshari explain isr here and in 7:157 as something burdensome to perform and obey; Ibn Ashur says that sense is intended here and that حمل reinforces the burden metaphor. IBNASHUR-FULL: The phrase qualifies isr as a religious burden like difficult rules imposed on earlier peoples, such as Israel's forty years in the wilderness and the rare features of the cow they had to slaughter; these disciplined disobedience and disregard for their messengers. TABATABAI: The account of Israel recalls God’s gifts of scripture, prophethood, and rule and Israel’s disobedience; the ending turns to believers seeking God’s help against unbelievers. TABATABAI: Israel faced heavy burdens and punishments, while the believers humbly ask not to be held to account for lapses or burdened as earlier peoples were, and ask forgiveness and victory. ASAD-NOTES reporting Asad: The requested burden recalls both the heavy ritual law imposed on the children of Israel and the world-renunciation Jesus recommended to his followers."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p2", "position": "Iṣr is a binding covenant or pledge.", "reasons": "MAJAZ: إصر means a burden or binding tie; a covenant or kinship that attaches someone to another is an إصر, as in the expression آصرة رحم. ABDURRAZZAQ reporting قتادة: Qatāda glosses “isr” as a covenant and pledge. TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī reads iṣr as a covenant: believers ask not to be bound by a covenant they cannot fulfill, lest failure, error, or forgetfulness bring the punishment suffered by earlier communities. TAB-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatadah glosses iṣr as a covenant and pledge, and says the covenant was made onerous for those before the Muslims. TAB-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujahid explains iṣr as a covenant. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas also glosses iṣr as a covenant. TAB-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi identifies the covenant as the one imposed on the Jews before the Muslims. TAB-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj says it is a covenant they could not bear; Jews and Christians failed to keep it and were destroyed. TAB-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak glosses iṣr a
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
