<<chunk 91, part 3 of 0..5>>
re include Jews and Christians.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM reporting مقاتل بن حيان: Muqātil b. Ḥayyān identifies those burdened before as the Jews and Christians, whom God destroyed. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Those who came before are the Jews; al-Dahhak adds the Christians. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak says the people before them include Christians as well."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q21", "question": "What is the unbearable load in the second petition?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q21/p1", "position": "The burden is punishment people cannot endure.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj identifies the unbearable burden as transformation into apes and swine. THALABI reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj identifies the unbearable burden with transformation into apes and swine. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Some distinguish the petitions as pardon from metamorphosis, forgiveness of sins, and mercy from slander; another distinction assigns them respectively to deeds, words, and beliefs or vows. MAWARDI-FULL reporting عطاء: Ata interprets the burden as being transformed into apes and swine. MAWARDI-FULL: The other view understands the unbearable burden as punishment. WAHIDI-BASIT: One explanation is that the petition asks God not to subject them to Hellfire, whose punishment no one can bear. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: They ask God not to punish them with the Fire. JISHUMI: Another interpretation asks not to be burdened with punishment beyond our strength. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj says it means transformation into apes and swine. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj interprets it as asking God not to transform believers into apes and swine. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting عطاء: Ata interprets the burden as transformation into apes and swine. RAZI-FULL reporting المعتزلة: Their second reply says taḥmīl is placing an unbearable load, so the phrase means punishment that cannot be endured; reading it as obligation is figurative. QURTUBI-FULL: One gloss takes pardon, forgiveness, and mercy as protection from the past nations’ punishments of metamorphosis, sinking, and pelting. QURTUBI-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj interprets it as asking not to be transformed into apes and pigs. NASAFI-FULL: An alternative gloss assigns pardon, forgiveness, and mercy protection respectively from metamorphosis, being swallowed by the earth, and drowning. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj interprets the burden as transformation into apes and pigs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Other explanations of the burden are hellfire or the whispers of the soul. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Specific readings assign pardon to protection from metamorphosis or actions, forgiveness to sinking or speech, mercy to the weighing of deeds, or each plea to death, the grave, and Judgment; Abu Hayyan says these restrictions lack evidence. DURR-FULL reporting عطاء بن أبي رباح: Ata ibn Abi Rabah interprets the plea as asking not to be transformed into apes and swine. ALUSI-FULL reporting بعض المحققين: Some investigators connect al-Baqara's fire prepared for unbelievers and opening mention of believers and unbelievers with Al ʿImran's concluding paradise prepared for the righteous, making the sūras like one sūra. ELMALILI: The plea covers unbearable burdens whether legal, which may drive people to revolt, or existential, which become torment and destruction; God could impose such things as a test or punishment, so believers ask for protection in every form. IBNASHUR-FULL: The unbearable load here means punishments people cannot endure, with the doubled verb form serving a causative function. TABRISI: A second explanation asks protection from punishment that people cannot endure in this life or the next. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting قوم: The fifth view takes it as the punishment of Hell. RAZI-FULL: Believers request easier obligations because severity invites shortcoming, which brings punishment they cannot endure; hence they ask for ease in duties."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p2", "position": "The burden is an onerous or impossible duty.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd interprets it as asking not to be obligated to follow a religion beyond their ability. THALABI reporting قتادة والضحاك والسدي وابن زيد: They take the plea to mean: do not require deeds beyond our ability. TABRISI: This humble appeal resembles the following plea not to impose what people cannot bear, which may also be devotional. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The plea covers unbearable obligations, calamities, and trials: believers ask not to be tested with what they cannot bear. DURR-FULL reporting الضحاك: Al-Dahhak reads the plea as asking not to be assigned acts beyond one's ability. TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī prefers the request not to impose deeds too heavy to perform, reading it as a plea for ease in religious duties. THALABI reporting إبراهيم: Ibrahim, in a report from Sufyan al-Thawri through Mansur, glosses it as hardship. WAHIDI-BASIT: Another explanation is a burden that is technically possible but onerous and painful; Arabs say they cannot bear someone's sight despite being physically able, as in 11:20. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada asks not to be burdened with the same harshness as those before us. TABRISI: One explanation asks not to be burdened with crushing duties or trials, such as killing oneself as repentance for sin. RAZI-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A Prophetic report says a servant should receive food and clothing and not be assigned work beyond what he can bear; al-Razi cites it for the hardship sense and gives no grading. QURTUBI-FULL: The request means not to burden people with work they cannot bear and thereby punish them, or with work they could do but could not sustain because of its hardship. QURTUBI-FULL reporting الكيا الطبري: Al-Kiya al-Tabari likewise uses the verse to deny hardship and constriction incompatible with the tolerant, upright religion. QURTUBI-FULL reporting الضحاك وابن زيد: Al-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd say the prayer asks not to be burdened with deeds people cannot bear. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The Old Testament, still practically valid for Christianity, has strict rules and restrictions on eating, drinking, and purification; Islam’s duties fit human nature and are manageable, with dispensations for personal hardship."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p3", "position": "The burden is overpowering sexual desire.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting سالم بن شابور: Salim ibn Shabur glosses the unbearable burden as overpowering sexual desire. IBNABIHATIM reporting مكحول: Makhūl glosses the burden as estrangement and intense sexual desire. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting مكحول: Makḥul identifies the burden as intense sexual desire. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting سلام بن سابور: Salam ibn Sabur says the unbearable thing is sexual desire; al-Naqqash transmits this from Mujahid, Ata, and Mak'hul. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting أبو الدرداء: Abu al-Darda seeks refuge from sexual desire for which there is no means of satisfaction. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting مكحول: A third view identifies it as sexual desire. QURTUBI-FULL reporting سلام بن سابور ومجاهد وعطاء: Salam ibn Sabur says the unbearable thing is sexual urge; al-Naqqash also transmits this interpretation from Mujahid and Ata. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting مكحول: Makhul and Salam ibn Sabur understand the unbearable burden as overpowering sexual desire; al-Naqqash also transmits this from Mujahid, Ata, and Makhul. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting أبو الدرداء: Abu al-Darda used to pray for refuge from sexual desire that could not be restrained. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting مكحول: Makḥul glosses the unbearable burden as estrangement and intense sexual desire; Ibn Abi Hatim transmits the gloss, followed by the divine answer, Yes, or in another report, I have done so. DURR-FULL reporting مكحول: Makhul interprets the unbearable matters as exile, sexual desire, and erection. DURR-FULL reporting سلام بن سابور: Salam ibn Sabur glosses the phrase as sexual desire. IBNABIHATIM reporting مكحول: Makhūl gives a second gloss: erection. QURTUBI-FULL reporting أبو الدرداء: Abu al-Darda used to pray for refuge from sexual urge without the means to satisfy it."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p4", "position": "The burden is inner speech and whispering.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas reports that believers asked how to repent of involuntary whisperings; Gabriel brought 2:286 to assure them they could not prevent such thoughts. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari concludes that God neither strains nor constricts a soul in religion, and does not charge it for an unacted intention, passing whisper, or fleeting thought. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Another view applies the phrase to inner speech and whisperings. BAGHAWI-FULL: An unnamed view takes the unbearable burden to mean inner speech and whispering. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting قوم: A fourth view identifies it as inner thoughts and their whisperings. BIQAI-FULL: The assurance is part of their supplication, praising God and asking Him to fulfill the Prophet’s promise; they fear being charged for unchosen inner whisperings they cannot prevent. DURR-FULL reporting أبو هريرة: The Prophet said God pardons his community's inward whisperings so long as they do not act on or speak them."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p5", "position": "The burden is passionate love.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting محمد بن عبد الوهاب: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab interprets the unbearable burden as passionate love. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting محمد بن عبد الوهاب: Muhammad ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhab identifies it as passionate love. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting الثوري عن منصور عن إبراهيم: A second view takes the unbearable thing to be love. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting النخعي: Al-Nakhaʿi interprets the unbearable burden as love. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting محمد بن عبد الوهاب: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab glosses the burden as passionate infatuation. THALABI reporting يحيى: Yahya says he would not punish lovers
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
