<<chunk 91, part 5 of 0..5>>
es. IBNASHUR-FULL: Alternatively, pardon, forgiveness, and mercy generalize the preceding specific requests and are their foundations, making this one encompassing prayer. TABATABAI: The three pleas progress from specific effect to general source: pardon removes sin's effect or recorded punishment, forgiveness removes and veils its inward state, and mercy is God's gift covering both."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q26", "question": "What does وَٱغْفِرْ لَنَا request?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q26/p1", "position": "Forgiveness conceals faults and averts exposure or punishment.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī explains forgiveness as concealing a slip between the servant and God instead of exposing and disgracing the sinner. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd also applies the request for forgiveness to committing something God prohibited. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة، سعيد بن جبير، السدي، مقاتل بن حيان: Abū Hurayra, Saʿīd b. Jubayr, al-Suddī, and Muqātil b. Ḥayyān are also reported to give this answer of forgiveness. NAHHAS: The same grammatical analysis applies to “forgive us,” “have mercy on us,” and “give us victory.” THALABI reporting الآخرون: Others take it as unintentional ignorance or oversight, which al-Tha'labi calls more correct because deliberate sin is not automatically forgiven, though it remains subject to God’s will unless it is unbelief. THALABI: Forgiveness asks God to cover sins and forgo punishment; mercy is needed because people cannot obey or avoid sin without divine aid. RAZI-FULL: Supplication can express humility rather than ask for an uncertain outcome; al-Razi compares requests for just judgment, fulfillment of promises, and forgiveness for repentant believers. QURTUBI-FULL: Forgiveness means covering sins; ghafr is concealment. BAYDAWI-FULL: “Forgive us” means conceal our faults and do not expose us through punishment. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another rationale maps faith to human origin, hearing and obeying to present life, and the plea for forgiveness onward to the afterlife. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting سيبويه: Sibawayh parses غفرانك as a verbal noun governed by an implicit command, “forgive us with Your forgiveness”; this makes the phrase a request. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Other grammarians parse غفرانك as an object of asking or as a nominative subject meaning “Your forgiveness is our aim.” ALUSI-FULL: To forgive is to conceal what is ugly and disclose what is beautiful. ELMALILI: He explains forgiveness as covering and concealing people’s faults, suppressing their blemishes, and not exposing them publicly. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The closing supplication teaches that sincere servants have inadvertent lapses which the Lord may forgive, and that Islam’s final, complete religion is founded on ease rather than burdensome worship. STUDYQURAN: Thy forgiveness is an entreaty with an implied imperative: Grant us Thy forgiveness."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q27", "question": "What does وَٱرْحَمْنَا request?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q27/p1", "position": "Mercy grants divine favor, aid, or salvation.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī says only God’s mercy saves people from punishment; deeds cannot save without mercy, so the prayer also asks for guidance to what pleases God. QUSHAYRI: They ask for mercy and victory in every state because they have no protector besides God; victory also means overcoming whatever distracts them from Him. JISHUMI: God’s mercy is provision in this world and Paradise in the next. KASHSHAF-FULL: This declares God’s justice and mercy; people could physically pray more than five times, fast longer than a month, or perform pilgrimage more than once. RAZI-FULL: After seeking release from bodily punishment and spiritual disgrace, believers seek reward: mercy asks for bodily delights of Paradise, while “You are our Protector” asks for spiritual reward culminating in witnessing divine majesty. QURTUBI-FULL: Mercy here is a favor that God initiates for people. BAYDAWI-FULL: “Have mercy on us” means show tenderness and favor. IBNKATHIR-FULL: God never imposes on a person more than they can bear; this expresses His kindness, mercy, and beneficence toward creation. BIQAI-FULL: The shift from direct address to speaking of God in the third person is a deferential appeal to His majesty and to His patience, mercy, and compassion. BIQAI-FULL: Repeating “our Lord” at the start of each request recalls the greatness of the occasion and God’s nurturing, kindness, and mercy. ALUSI-FULL: This is a fresh divine statement after believers accept the commands, revealing the grace and mercy built into the obligations before they ask for it. ALUSI-FULL: This easing is grace, mercy, or special favor upon this community. ALUSI-FULL: Mercy is gracious concern for the servants that brings increase. ELMALILI: Every community’s law is a divinely imposed burden: believers receive a straight law as mercy, while unbelievers receive a crooked one as the effect of justice and wrath; what counts as justice differs with their spiritual condition, and God turns hearts, so the plea asks for steadfastness in Islam. ELMALILI: The request for mercy asks God to bestow blessings on the petitioners. TABATABAI: Repeating “our Lord” four times evokes divine mercy and recalls the speakers' servitude and abasement."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
