<<chunk 91, part 2 of 0..5>>
s a cord tying loads. TABATABAI reporting قيل: One reported definition of الإصر is a heavy burden."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p6", "position": "Iṣr can refer to metamorphosis into apes and swine.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL reporting عطاء وابن زيد: Ata and Ibn Zayd interpret iṣr as metamorphosis into apes and pigs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting عطاء: Ata explains isr as transformation into apes and pigs."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p7", "position": "Iṣr is a covenant with Israelite restrictions.", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Iṣr is a covenant with Israelite restrictions."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q18", "question": "How is إِصْرًا read?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q18/p1", "position": "The word is also read in the plural, “āṣāran”; Ubayy’s reading adds a shadda to “do not place.”.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL reporting أبي: The word is also read in the plural, “āṣāran”; Ubayy’s reading adds a shadda to “do not place.”"}, {"id": "2:286/q18/p2", "position": "A reading transmitted from Asim has isran with damma on the hamza.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting عاصم: A reading transmitted from Asim has isran with damma on the hamza."}, {"id": "2:286/q18/p3", "position": "A reading reported from Asim has the hamza of isr with a damma.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting عاصم: A reading reported from Asim has the hamza of isr with a damma."}, {"id": "2:286/q18/p4", "position": "Tuʾākhidhnā is read with hamza from taking someone to task; the wāw reading either eases hamza to wāw by regular phonology or derives from wākhadhahu, as Abū al-Baqāʾ says.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: Tuʾākhidhnā is read with hamza from taking someone to task; the wāw reading either eases hamza to wāw by regular phonology or derives from wākhadhahu, as Abū al-Baqāʾ says."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q19", "question": "What earlier burden does the first petition recall?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q19/p1", "position": "The first petition recalls stringent duties and punishments imposed on earlier peoples.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting قتادة: Qatāda explains the comparison as God having imposed a heavier burden on earlier communities. TAB-FULL reporting عطاء بن أبي رباح: ʿAta interprets the prayer as asking not to be transformed into apes and swine as earlier peoples were. TAB-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatadah takes the phrase as a plea not to impose the severe strictness imposed on earlier communities. TAB-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi identifies the burden as the severe restrictions and prohibitions imposed on earlier people. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة: Abū Hurayra transmits the answer نعم to the request not to impose the former burden. QUSHAYRI: Earlier communities voiced needs through an intermediary, asking Moses to pray, while this community is directly told to call upon God. QUSHAYRI: Unlike earlier communities, this community is directly commanded: “Your Lord says, call upon Me, and I will answer you.” QUSHAYRI: Earlier peoples needed time to pass before repentance was accepted; for this community remorse itself is repentance. QUSHAYRI: Earlier peoples asked for an idol like others, but this community is distinguished by the radiance of unity and countless special merits. KASHSHAF-FULL: The prayer asks to be spared punishments imposed on earlier peoples, then punishment for failing to preserve difficult duties imposed on them. TABRISI: The ban on good foods for the earlier community is illustrated by 4:160, which says they were forbidden lawful good things because of wrongdoing. QURTUBI-FULL: Revelation includes weighty duties such as one facing ten and emigration, but God eased this community rather than imposing the painful burdens placed on earlier peoples. QURTUBI-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada interprets the prayer as asking not to be burdened as harshly as earlier peoples were. NASAFI-FULL: This request concerns protection from punishments that befell earlier peoples. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada reads the prayer as asking God not to impose the severity imposed on earlier people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Another interpretation distinguishes a first request to be spared difficult duties from a second request to be spared punishments inflicted on earlier communities for failing to keep them. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The plea asks not to be burdened with arduous duties, even if bearable, like the shackles imposed on earlier peoples; Muhammad’s merciful law removes such burdens through its easy, tolerant religion. BIQAI-FULL: God rewards their faith by lifting the burdens, hardship, and accountability for mistakes and forgetfulness that marked the earlier community. BIQAI-FULL: The plea recalls that earlier communities received laws that could break their backs, making the present community’s lighter law a reason for gratitude. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: The quoted rules isolate people with leprosy and prescribe cutting away or burning affected clothing, leather, or houses; chronic flow also brings lengthy impurity rules. BIQAI-FULL: The author presents these extensive prior-scripture burdens as examples of what earlier peoples were charged with and says Christian burdens will be discussed in al-Ma'ida. BIQAI-FULL: Biqāʿī cites the command that the Gospel community judge by God’s revelation in the Gospel while discussing the burdens imposed on earlier communities. DURR-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada contrasts the harsh restrictions imposed on earlier communities with the easing, facility, and well-being given this community. DURR-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi identifies the unbearable load with the stringent prohibitions and fetters imposed on earlier people. BURSEVI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: God spared this community comparable strictures and earlier peoples' punishments; the Prophet describes his mission as the easy, tolerant upright way and says his community is spared sinking, metamorphosis, and drowning. IBNASHUR-FULL: Some distinguish the first prayer as relief from earlier peoples' punishments and the second as relief from severe obligations; Ibn Ashur treats both prayers like the plea not to be taken to task. TABATABAI: After their unqualified assent, the believers acknowledge their weakness and the fate of earlier peoples, asking for mercy because they have no power or protection apart from God. STUDYQURAN reporting IK: Islam is usually understood as easing and reducing ritual and legal obligations borne by earlier peoples. BIQAI-FULL: As an example of earlier burdens, the second book of the Torah prescribes sprinkling sacrificial blood on the altar’s corners. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: The cited Mosaic law requires animal offerings at the sanctuary and severe punishment for slaughter or eating blood outside the prescribed rite. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: Purification from leprosy requires birds, cedar, ritual washing and shaving, waiting outside the home, and a further offering on the eighth day. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: The cited laws prescribe washing and impurity after emissions or contact with menstruants, and lengthy purification periods after childbirth: shorter for a son and longer for a daughter. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: The Torah forbids harvesting every olive or grape and delays eating fruit from newly planted trees for three years, dedicates the fourth year's fruit, then permits eating in year five. DURR-FULL reporting عائشة: A Jewish woman told Aisha that grave punishment comes from urine and that it is cut from skin and clothes; after Aisha relayed this, the Prophet confirmed it."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q20", "question": "Who are ٱلَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q20/p1", "position": "Those before are the Israelites or Jews.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting عثمان بن عطاء ومالك بن أنس وأبو عبيدة والمؤرخ والقتيبي وابن الأنباري: Another group glosses إصر as a burden or severity and asks that burdens like those imposed on the Jews not be laid on believers; examples include fifty prayers, alms on profits, cutting away impurity, and sins displayed at the door. They connect it to 7:157. JISHUMI: The earlier people are the Jews, who faced severe obligations. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting عثمان: A second view, attributed to ʿUthman, ʿAta, Malik, Abu ʿUbayda, and others, asks that the law not be made as severe as it was for earlier Jews: fifty prayers, a quarter of wealth in alms, cutting away impurity from clothes, and sins displayed on the door; the author links this to the verse about removing burdens. RAZI-FULL reporting أهل التفسير: Exegetes explain the prayer as asking not to impose the severe obligations placed on Jews: traditions cited include fifty prayers, a quarter of wealth in alms, cutting away garment impurity, worldly penalties for lapses, and loss of formerly lawful foods. NASAFI-FULL: The people burdened with such earlier obligations are the Jews. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The people before the believers here are the Jews. ALUSI-FULL: Al-Baqara opens by describing belief in what was revealed to Muhammad and earlier prophets; Al ʿImran closes by affirming that some People of the Book believe in both revelations. ELMALILI reporting Kaffâl: Kaffal says the fifth book claimed as Torah contains further examples of the Jews’ harsh laws; believers prayed for protection from such severity, which God later removed, as 7:157 states. ELMALILI reporting müfessirîn: Exegetes describe severe requirements imposed on earlier peoples, especially Jews: fifty daily prayers, a quarter of property as tax, cutting away impurity on clothing, exile, swift executions, self-killing for repentance, immediate punishment for rebellion, and prohibition of some lawful foods after an error. TABATABAI: “Those before us” refers to the People of the Book, especially the Jews, as the sūra's stories and 7:157 suggest."}, {"id": "2:286/q20/p2", "position": "Those befo
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
