<<chunk 91, part 4 of 0..5>>
 because their sins arise from compulsion rather than choice. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting إبراهيم: Ibrahim says the burden is love. ITQAN reporting أبو هريرة: Al-Daylamī transmits a Prophetic report from Abū Hurayra that the last two verses of al-Baqara are Qur'an, healing, and beloved to God. Against: ITQAN reporting من قال: A rejected interpretation glosses the prayer not to be burdened beyond capacity as referring to love and passion; al-Kawashi records it."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p6", "position": "The burden is enemies' gloating.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting وهب بن منبه: Wahb ibn Munabbih reports that Job said the hardest part of his long affliction was his enemies’ gloating. BAGHAWI-FULL: An unnamed explanation identifies the burden as the gloating of enemies. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another explanation is the gloating of enemies. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting وهب: Wahb reports that Job was asked what was hardest in his affliction and answered: the enemies’ gloating."}, {"id": "2:286/q21/p7", "position": "The burden is separation or estrangement.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL: Another unnamed explanation identifies it as separation and estrangement."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q22", "question": "What does طَاقَةَ mean and how is it formed?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q22/p1", "position": "Ṭāqa is ability, an irregular shortened verbal noun of iṭāqa.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Mā lā ṭāqata lanā bihi means a burden that weighs heavily on us. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ṭāqa is a verbal noun from iṭāqa, like ṭāʿa from iṭāʿa, and can stand in place of the verbal noun. RAZI-FULL: Ṭāqa is a verbal noun from iṭāqa, like ṭāʿa from iṭāʿa and ijāba from ijāba, and is used in place of the verbal noun. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: Al-Razi’s school rejects the hardship-only gloss: it would duplicate the preceding prayer, and ṭāqa means ability, so the apparent sense is what one has no power to do; “hard” is only figurative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Ṭāqa is an anomalous verbal noun, not a productive pattern; it can mean absolute inability or a burden that is possible but severely difficult, mapping respectively to punishment or duties. SAMIN-DURR: Ṭāqa means ability and is an irregularly shortened verbal noun of aṭāqa; the expected form is iṭāqa, like other exceptional maṣdars such as ghāra, jāba, and nabāt, and it is not productive. IBNASHUR-FULL: Ṭāqa derives from iṭāqa, with the hamza dropped for ease, as in jāba/ijāba and ṭāʿa/iṭāʿa. SAMIN-DURR: The author supports the exceptional verbal-noun pattern with Qurʾān 71:17 and a poetic example of ʿaṭāʾ."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q23", "question": "How are the two burden petitions related?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q23/p1", "position": "The second request repeats the first in meaning.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The second request repeats the first in meaning."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q24", "question": "How do the forms of the burden verbs work?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q24/p1", "position": "The supplicatory verbs are jussive because they express requests; lā tuḥammil is phrased as a prohibition.", "reasons": "NAHHAS: The supplicatory verbs are jussive because they express requests; lā tuḥammil is phrased as a prohibition."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p2", "position": "Ibn Abi ʿAblah reads the word with fatḥa on the wāw.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL reporting ابن أبي عبلة: Ibn Abi ʿAblah reads the word with fatḥa on the wāw."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p3", "position": "A reading doubles the tāʾ in tuḥammil to add emphasis.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: A reading doubles the tāʾ in tuḥammil to add emphasis."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p4", "position": "Abu reads the verb in an intensive form, comparable to the difference between جرح and جرّح.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abu reads the verb in an intensive form, comparable to the difference between جرح and جرّح."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p5", "position": "Al-Zamakhsharī distinguishes the two doubled forms: the first intensifies carrying upon someone, while the second causatively shifts ḥamala from one object to two.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī distinguishes the two doubled forms: the first intensifies carrying upon someone, while the second causatively shifts ḥamala from one object to two."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p6", "position": "Ubayy's doubled mīm in lā tuḥammil ʿalaynā intensifies the action.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR reporting أبي: Ubayy's doubled mīm in lā tuḥammil ʿalaynā intensifies the action."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p7", "position": "Aṣāran is also read in the plural, and one reading doubles the tāʾ in tuḥammil.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: Aṣāran is also read in the plural, and one reading doubles the tāʾ in tuḥammil."}, {"id": "2:286/q24/p8", "position": "The shadda in this phrase intensifies the act of imposing a burden; the other form changes the verb from one object to two.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The shadda in this phrase intensifies the act of imposing a burden; the other form changes the verb from one object to two."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q25", "question": "What does وَٱعْفُ عَنَّا request?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q25/p1", "position": "Pardon removes sin's punishment or traces.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The threat in 2:284 does not target an unacted sinful inclination, since God promised pardon for minor sins when major sins are avoided; it targets concealed unbelief. TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī says the believers ask pardon for falling short in commanded duties, so God will overlook the shortfall and not punish them, even when the duties are light. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd says pardon is sought for falling short in any of God’s commands. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة، محمد بن كعب، سعيد بن جبير: Abū Hurayra, Muḥammad b. Kaʿb, and Saʿīd b. Jubayr are also reported to give this answer of pardon. THALABI: The plea واعف عنا asks God to overlook and pardon human shortcomings and sins. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Another interpretation assigns pardon to minor sins, forgiveness to grave sins, and mercy to the weighing of deeds despite spiritual bankruptcy. THALABI reporting بعضهم: A further interpretation asks pardon during death's agony, forgiveness in the grave's darkness, and mercy there as well. QUSHAYRI: “Pardon us” concerns the present, while “forgive us” concerns the future. WAHIDI-ASBAB reporting النبي: The Prophet says God has pardoned his community for thoughts they do not act on or speak aloud. JISHUMI: Another interpretation distinguishes pardon for minor sins from forgiveness of major ones. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Pardon concerns what believers committed and disclosed; forgiveness asks God to conceal what He knows; mercy asks for freely initiated favor. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi’s alternative is that God takes the sinner through punishment while the sinner clings to God for pardon, so each is figuratively taking the other. RAZI-FULL: ʿAfw means removing punishment, whereas maghfira conceals the sin and protects the sinner from the shame and exposure of punishment in the grave. QURTUBI-FULL: ʿAfw means leaving a sin without punishing its doer. BAYDAWI-FULL: “Pardon us” means erase our sins. NASAFI-FULL: The requests are not redundant: pardon erases major sins, while forgiveness covers minor sins. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: غفرانك asks pardon for falling short, or recognizes that even perfect worship falls short beside divine majesty. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: A further explanation says God takes the sinner in punishment while the sinner appeals to God for pardon and generosity, so each is figuratively described as taking the other. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another view makes the prayer hypothetical: even if forgetfulness could warrant accountability, pardon is requested because constant vigilance would be burdensome. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Pardon removes punishment; forgiveness conceals the sin and protects from humiliation; mercy bestows beneficence, with each petition increasing in scope and intensity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الراغب: Al-Raghib similarly defines pardon as removing sin’s punishment, forgiveness as covering it and replacing it with kindness, and mercy as an outpouring of beneficence. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Pardon concerns shortcomings between the servant and God; forgiveness concerns failings toward other people, whom God is asked not to expose to the servant’s ugly deeds; mercy asks protection from future sin. IBNKATHIR-FULL: A sinner needs God to pardon him, conceal his faults from people, and preserve him from falling into the same kind of sin again. BIQAI-FULL: They ask God to remove the punishment for all sins, then not to mention those sins at all; pardon addresses bodily punishment and forgiveness spiritual torment. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī says mercy raises the pardoned and forgiven sinner to the same share of mercy as one who never sinned. BIQAI-FULL: After asking for pardon, forgiveness, and mercy, believers seek the fruit of divine guardianship: victory through speech and arms. BIQAI-FULL reporting أبو الحسن الحرالي: Al-Harali says the surah's forgiveness treats sin as though it never occurred, and mercy raises the pardoned sinner to high ranks; its opening is guidance and its close is vicegerency. DURR-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd distinguishes pardon for falling short in commands, forgiveness for violating prohibitions, and mercy as necessary to fulfill commands and avoid prohibitions; no one is saved except through mercy. BURSEVI: Pardon means removing the traces of sins; forgiveness means concealing faults so the believer is not exposed before people. BURSEVI: Pardon and forgiveness precede the request for mercy because clearing away faults comes before adorning the servant with favor. ALUSI-FULL: To pardon is to erase the traces of sins by withholding punishment. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: An alternative assigns pardon to deeds, forgiveness to words, and mercy to the weighing of the scal
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
