<<chunk 91, part 1 of 0..5>>
s covenants. TAB-FULL reporting الربيع: Al-Rabiʿ glosses iṣr as a covenant, citing the same word in 3:81 as meaning God’s covenant. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas explains iṣr in 3:81 as God’s covenant. ZAJJAJ: Iṣr can mean a bond of kinship or covenant; Arabs say no kinship tie or favor binds someone to another. ZAJJAJ reporting الحطيئة: Al-Ḥuṭayʾa uses āṣira for kinship or covenant, describing affection without such a tie. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس، مجاهد، السدي: Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and al-Suddī understand iṣr as a covenant or binding commitment. IBNABIHATIM reporting الحسن، الضحاك، مقاتل بن حيان: Al-Ḥasan, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, and Muqātil b. Ḥayyān give the related gloss mīthāq, a binding covenant. THALABI reporting مجاهد وعطاء وقتادة والضحاك والربيع ومقاتل والسدي والكلبي وابن جريج والفراء: This group glosses إصر as an unbearable covenant or pledge, whose breach brought punishment on earlier people, especially the Jews; they cite 3:81’s use of إصر for a covenant. THALABI: The word can name what binds things together, a kinship bond, or a relationship formed by covenant; the cited poem uses آصرة for such a tie. MAWARDI-FULL reporting ابن عباس، مجاهد، قتادة: Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, and Qatada interpret the burden as a covenant too difficult to fulfill. WAHIDI-BASIT: Isr fundamentally conveys binding or attachment; it names burdens, covenants, and kin ties, supported by poetry and by the covenant called isr in 3:81. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, in reports from Al-Walibi, Ata, and Atiyya, and Mujahid, Qatada, Muqatil, Al-Suddi, Al-Kalbi, and Al-Farra say it means an unbearable covenant whose breach brought punishment on the Jews. JISHUMI: Isr can mean a heavy burden or a binding covenant. JISHUMI reporting ابن عباس وقتادة ومجاهد والضحاك والربيع والسدي: They interpret isr as a covenant too difficult to fulfill. BAGHAWI-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujahid, ʿAta, Qatada, al-Suddi, al-Kalbi, and others say the burden is a severe covenant the Israelites could not fulfill and were punished for breaking; the wording is supported by the covenant verse. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting الطبري والزجاج: For these authors the burden included killing themselves, cutting their bodies, bodily punishment for sins, and difficult covenants. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting قتادة ومجاهد وابن عباس والسدي وابن جريج والربيع وابن زيد: These exegetes explain isr as a firm covenant or solemn pact. TABRISI: Iṣr means weight or burden; it can also denote a binding covenant or kinship tie. TABRISI reporting النابغة: Al-Nābigha also uses iṣr to mean a covenant or binding promise. TABRISI: Earlier communities were punished for sins, had lawful foods forbidden, and received heavier covenants and obligations; this community's lighter burden is a mercy. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA reporting ابن فارس: Ibn Fāris gives isr the senses of burden and covenant, and relates it to bonds of kinship or agreement. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Arabic usage can call any bond, kinship, or covenant an isr. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Some interpreters distinguish two Qurʾānic senses of isr: burden in 2:286 and covenant elsewhere. Against: IBNJAWZI-NUZHA reporting ابن عباس، ومجاهد، والضحاك، والسدي: These authorities take isr in 2:286 as a covenant; the author says this invalidates the two-sense division. IBNJAWZI-ZAD reporting ابن عباس، مجاهد، الضحاك، السدي: One interpretation of iṣr is a covenant. RAZI-FULL reporting أهل التفسير: The second interpretation asks that God not impose a covenant as severe as that imposed on earlier people; al-Razi says it essentially returns to the first view with an extra unstated element, so the first is preferable. RAZI-FULL: A covenant is called an isr because it is weighty; 3:81 uses the word for God’s covenant and pact. RAZI-FULL reporting القفال: Al-Qaffal says examining the fifth book of the Torah claimed by the Jews reveals many severe covenants and remarkable details. QURTUBI-FULL: Iṣr can mean covenant, as in the covenant taken in another verse, as well as narrowness, sin, or burden. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Iṣr means a burdensome, difficult command; āṣira is a binding tie such as a pact, kinship, or pledge, while iṣār is a rope that binds loads. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting القفال: Al-Qaffal says readers of the fifth book of the Torah attributed to the Jews will find many remarkable instances of their grave covenants and pledges. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, Qatada, al-Suddi, Ibn Jurayj, al-Rabiʿ, and Ibn Zayd explain isr as a solemn covenant and pledge. SAMIN-DURR: Because a covenant is heavy, iṣr also means covenant or compact, as in God's covenant taken from the prophets in 3:81. BIQAI-FULL reporting الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī explains iṣr as a weighty covenant whose bearing entails severe hardship. BIQAI-FULL reporting الرب: Israelites are told not to take a widow's garment as pledge and to leave forgotten sheaves and olives for resident outsiders, orphans, and widows, remembering their slavery in Egypt. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas glosses isr as a covenant or binding charge. DURR-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujahid also explains isr as a covenant. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas tells Nafiʿ ibn al-Azraq that isr is the covenant imposed on the Jews, whose breach led to transformation into apes and swine; Abu Talib's verse attests the Arabic usage. DURR-FULL reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj reads isr as an unbearable covenant imposed on Jews and Christians who failed it and were destroyed; he identifies the unbearable burden with transformation into apes and swine. ITQAN reporting أبو القاسم: Abu al-Qasim says isr means “covenant” in Nabataean. ELMALILI: Isr is a heavy burden or bond that holds the bearer in place, associated with captivity and confinement; it can also refer to a weighty covenant, subjection, the womb, and kinship. IBNASHUR-FULL: Isr originally means what is used to bind and fasten things; it later denotes a solemn covenant difficult to fulfill and then a burdensome obligation. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas interprets isr as a covenant the community could not fulfill, whose breach would bring punishment. STUDYQURAN reporting Ṭ: The burden may refer to covenants imposed on earlier religious communities under different conditions, including Jews and Christians; it may also mean other burdens."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p3", "position": "Its root denotes binding, including kinship ties and cords.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī distinguishes fatḥa-initial aṣr from the verse’s iṣr: aṣr can mean a bond of kinship that draws one toward another, as in Arabic usage. ZAJJAJ: Maʾṣir and iṣār refer to a binding restraint or the cord used to tie things. THALABI: The poem’s آصرة is evidence for the word’s sense of a bond or tie between people. TABRISI reporting الكميت: Al-Kumayt's verse uses āṣirat al-arḥām for the bond of kinship. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Al-Ḥuṭayʾa’s line describes people showing kindness without a bond or kinship. RAZI-FULL: Isr can also mean affection or kinship: caring for someone makes the hardships that befall them weigh on one’s heart. QURTUBI-FULL reporting الجوهري: The word can also mean a rope binding loads; aṣara means to confine, and Jawhari gives maʾṣir/maʾṣar and plural maʾāṣir, noting common mispronunciation. BAYDAWI-FULL: The earlier people’s burdens may be Israelite duties—killing one another, cutting away impurity, fifty daily prayers, and giving a quarter of wealth as alms—or their hardships and ordeals. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari derives isr from a burden that holds its bearer in place, metaphorically describing harsh duties such as self-killing and cutting impurity from skin or clothing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting قيل: Another explanation is severance of kinship ties. SAMIN-DURR: Iṣr in 7:157 means burdensome legal duties; it broadens to anything heavy, and some reportedly interpret it here as enemies' gloating, citing an unnamed poet. SAMIN-DURR reporting الحطيئة: Iṣr can also mean affection or kinship; al-Ḥuṭayʾa says that no tie of kinship draws him to the person. SAMIN-DURR: Iṣr may be the thing by which objects are bound; iṣār is the cord securing loads, from the verb aṣara, “to bind.” BURSEVI: Iṣr denotes a heavy load that pins its bearer in place, and here means burdensome religious duties. BURSEVI: Israelites faced severe duties: self-killing in repentance, cutting mistaken limbs and impurity, fifty daily prayers, mosque-only prayer, fasting restrictions, forbidden good things, quarter-wealth alms, and written records of nightly sins."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p4", "position": "Iṣr is a sin without repentance or expiation.", "reasons": "THALABI reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd says the plea is not to impose a sin for which there is no repentance or expiation; the word can also mean a tie or bond. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd also explains isr as a sin for which there is neither expiation nor repentance. QURTUBI-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd also says iṣr means a sin for which there is neither repentance nor expiation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd also explains isr as a sin for which there is neither expiation nor repentance. DURR-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd takes the plea against isr to mean asking not to bear a sin for which there is no repentance or expiation. ALUSI-FULL reporting قيل: Another interpretation takes iṣr as a sin for which there is no repentance, so the supplication asks protection from committing it. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd takes the prayer to ask that God not impose a sin without repentance or expiation. BAGHAWI-FULL: Another explanation calls the burden a sin for which there is no repentance and takes the plea to ask protection from such a sin."}, {"id": "2:286/q17/p5", "position": "Its root denotes binding; in context it names a heavy burden.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL: The word’s underlying sense is restraint and binding firmly. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya links these senses to the root for something binding, such a
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
