<<chunk 92, part 2 of 0..5>>
, and affirming the afterlife, then contrasts unbelievers and hypocrites before closing with obedient believers. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: Baqara similarly links Iblis being among the disbelievers with the sūra’s closing prayer for victory over the disbelieving people."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p2", "position": "Victory includes prevailing through proof and argument.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: The prayer asks for victory in establishing proof, war, and other affairs, so Islam may prevail as promised. WAHIDI-BASIT: The requested victory includes establishing the proof, prevailing in war and other affairs, and making the religion manifest over every religion as promised. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: God is their helper and manager of affairs; they ask to prevail in arguments, war, and other affairs so their religion triumphs as promised. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: They ask for victory in argument, war, and other affairs, and for their religion to prevail as promised. JISHUMI: Another view understands the requested help as argument and victory. TABRISI: The final plea asks God to help believers overcome unbelievers by force and by the strength of their argument. RAZI-FULL: The first rational argument invokes God's eternal knowledge that one who dies in unbelief will never believe; that foreknown nonbelief is incompatible with belief, making the command appear to require a contradiction and likewise raising the problem of compulsion. RAZI-FULL: Al-Rāzī deems the rational proofs decisive: when they conflict with an apparent scriptural meaning, one must preserve the proofs and interpret the apparent text, or undermine rational grounds for monotheism, prophecy, and scripture. RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: They answer that Qurʾanic usage associates bearing with obligation, as in the human bearing of the trust at 33:72; even without that idiom, the phrase covers both punishment and obligation, so narrowing it needs proof. RAZI-FULL: The requested victory includes military struggle, debate by proof, and Islam’s political ascendancy over other religions, as promised at 9:33. QURTUBI-FULL reporting المهدوي وغيره وابن عطية: Al-Mahdawi and others offer the sense that no one is charged with another’s sin; Ibn Atiyya accepts the principle but says this verse is not its proof. BIQAI-FULL: Mentioning the opposing people’s strength urges sincere reliance on God, while calling them kāfirūn identifies those concealing the clear proofs described at the sura’s opening."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p3", "position": "Victory includes military and worldly ascendancy.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL reporting أصحابنا: The author’s school rejects moral annihilation: reward for good and liability for evil can coexist, and the arrival of one does not erase the other. RAZI-FULL reporting الجبائي: Al-Jubbaʾi reads the verse conditionally: reward remains only if not invalidated, and punishment only if not expiated by repentance, since pure everlasting reward and punishment cannot coexist. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi imagines two stations: outward religious law asks for no severe duties; the beginning of unveiling asks not to demand praise, gratitude, or knowledge commensurate with divine majesty, which humans cannot attain. Law precedes inner reality, explaining the order. RAZI-FULL reporting المحققون: Some spiritual authorities interpret victory as God’s angelic, spiritual power overcoming bodily forces that urge the soul toward what is other than God. ALUSI-FULL: The requested victory is against enemy combatants or, more broadly, all unbelievers. ALUSI-FULL reporting الحسن: As transmitted by Abu Hayyan from al-Hasan, the phrase is an implied command to say this in prayer: God teaches servants how to ask so He may grant and reward them. IBNASHUR-FULL: Alternatively, the Prophet and believers may be speaking, explaining their assent as understanding that only thoughts with voluntary outward effects or settled conviction incur account; Ibn Ashur says the following clause makes this unlikely. TABATABAI: The clause connects backward by explaining that God asks no more than people can hear and obey. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The early emigrants left everything for Medina and the Helpers welcomed them; the ending tells these early Muslims their standing with God as a reward and offers later followers a lesson in religious life. MUSLIM reporting عبد الله بن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the warning about hidden thoughts deeply troubled the believers; the Prophet told them to hear, obey, and submit, and Allah placed faith in their hearts before revealing 2:286."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p4", "position": "The opponents include devils.", "reasons": "BURSEVI: The request for victory also seeks protection from devils, since they belong among the disbelieving enemies."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p5", "position": "God protects believers and grants victory over unbelievers.", "reasons": "MUQATIL: God protects believers and grants victory over unbelievers."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p6", "position": "The petition shows that public calling to religion was the believers' first concern after committing themselves to hear and obey.", "reasons": "TABATABAI: The petition shows that public calling to religion was the believers' first concern after committing themselves to hear and obey."}, {"id": "2:286/q32/p7", "position": "نصر normally takes على, while نجّى takes من; the Qur’an uses these usual prepositions elsewhere.", "reasons": "SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH: نصر normally takes على, while نجّى takes من; the Qur’an uses these usual prepositions elsewhere."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q33", "question": "How are the petition verbs inflected?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q33/p1", "position": "The Basrans treat waʿfu as an imperative in form but indeclinable; the Kūfans make it jussive, as with the following requests.", "reasons": "NAHHAS reporting البصريون: The Basrans treat waʿfu as an imperative in form but indeclinable; the Kūfans make it jussive, as with the following requests."}, {"id": "2:286/q33/p2", "position": "Some call prohibitive la a request particle so the label includes supplication as well as prohibition; here la is a prayer asking God not to hold the speakers accountable.", "reasons": "BURHAN reporting بعضهم: Some call prohibitive la a request particle so the label includes supplication as well as prohibition; here la is a prayer asking God not to hold the speakers accountable."}, {"id": "2:286/q33/p3", "position": "Prohibitive lā is used with a present verb, makes it jussive, and places the action in the future; it may express either prohibition or supplication.", "reasons": "ITQAN: Prohibitive lā is used with a present verb, makes it jussive, and places the action in the future; it may express either prohibition or supplication."}, {"id": "2:286/q33/p4", "position": "Ibn Asfur gives inconsistent accounts, alternately saying the governing verb may be stated or must remain implicit.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL reporting ابن عصفور: Ibn Asfur gives inconsistent accounts, alternately saying the governing verb may be stated or must remain implicit."}, {"id": "2:286/q33/p5", "position": "The coordinating and answer uses of lā do not occur in the Qur’an.", "reasons": "ITQAN: The coordinating and answer uses of lā do not occur in the Qur’an."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q34", "question": "Did 2:286 abrogate the accounting of 2:284?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q34/p1", "position": "2:286 lifted or abrogated the earlier accounting for unacted thoughts.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting بعضهم: Some interpreters say that the earlier ruling about inward thoughts was abrogated by 2:286; Abu Hurayra reports people’s distress and God affirming their concluding petitions. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas explains that Ibn ʿUmar feared people would perish under 2:284; 2:286 then abrogated accountability for inner whisperings while retaining accountability for speech and deeds. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas said Ibn Umar wept over 2:284 as the Companions had, and that 2:286 abrogated it. TAB-FULL reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿid ibn Jubayr reported that 2:286 abrogated the earlier statement that God would account for what people disclosed or concealed. TAB-FULL reporting عامر: Amir said the verse about hidden thoughts being accounted for was abrogated by the following verse, 2:286. TAB-FULL reporting الشعبي: Al-Shaʿbi said 2:286 abrogated 2:284, which had said that God accounts for what people disclose or hide. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas says 2:284 greatly distressed the Companions, who were told to say “we hear and obey”; it was abrogated through 2:285–286, excusing inner thoughts while holding them to actions. TAB-FULL reporting الشعبي: Al-Shaʿbi reported that the burden of 2:284 lasted until 2:286 came, whereupon the latter abrogated what preceded it. TAB-FULL reporting ابن مسعود: Ibn Masʿud said accountability for hidden thoughts preceded 2:286, which abrogated the earlier verse. TAB-FULL reporting مجاهد: Mujahid and his co-transmitters reported that 2:286 abrogated the earlier verse about disclosed or concealed thoughts. TAB-FULL reporting عكرمة، وعامر: Ikrima and Amir reported the same position: 2:286 abrogated the earlier accounting for hidden thoughts. TAB-FULL reporting الحسن: Al-Hasan said 2:286 erased 2:284, including its statement about what is disclosed or hidden. TAB-FULL reporting عائشة: Aisha said that 2:286 abrogated the earlier verse about disclosed or concealed thoughts. TAB-FULL reporting قتادة: Qatada reported that 2:286 abrogated the preceding verse about God accounting for disclosed or hidden thoughts. TAB-FULL reporting عبد الله بن مسعود: Abu Ubayda reports from Ibn Masʿud that the following verse, 2:286, abrogated the prior statement about hidden thoughts. TAB-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi reports that people were initially charged for inner whisperings as wel
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
