<<chunk 92, part 3 of 0..5>>
l as deeds; their complaint led God to abrogate that rule because thoughts exceeded their capacity. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو عبيدة بن عبدالله: Abū ʿUbayda b. ʿAbd Allāh says 2:284 was abrogated by the following verse, which assigns each soul its earned good and bad deeds. MAWARDI-FULL reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayra reports that the Companions feared accountability for inner thoughts, after which the capacity verse was revealed; Ibn Masud also held this abrogation view. WAHIDI-ASBAB: Al-Wahidi states that the verse of capacity abrogated the earlier ruling about what people disclosed inwardly. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting ابن عباس وأكثر المفسرين: Ibn Abbas and most exegetes say this verse abrogated the burden of involuntary thoughts and whispers imposed by the earlier verse. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: This verse abrogates the believers' complaint about being held to account for intrusive thoughts and inner speech. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Ibn Kathir calls this the abrogating verse that lifts the Companions’ fear about 2:284’s accountability for hidden thoughts. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Salim reports that Ibn ʿUmar wept over 2:284; Ibn ʿAbbas says the Companions reacted similarly and that the following verse abrogated it. DURR-FULL reporting علي: ʿAli says the Companions were distressed that thoughts might be judged; this verse then abrogated the earlier accounting for thoughts. DURR-FULL reporting ابن مسعود: Ibn Masʿud says accounting preceded the revelation of “each soul has what it earned,” which abrogated the earlier verse. ITQAN: The warning that God will call people to account for what they conceal or reveal inwardly is said to be abrogated by the next verse’s statement that God burdens no soul beyond its capacity. SUYUTI-LUBAB reporting أبو هريرة: In Abu Hurayra’s account, God abrogated the earlier burden by revealing “God does not burden a soul beyond its capacity.” MUSLIM reporting أبو هريرة: The report explicitly says Allah abrogated the earlier passage about accounting for inner thoughts and then revealed the assurance that He burdens no soul beyond its capacity."}, {"id": "2:286/q34/p2", "position": "2:284 remains operative or is clarified and specified.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari prefers that 2:284 remains in force: abrogation requires a later ruling to negate the earlier one in every respect, and 2:286 does not negate divine accounting. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The sound view is that the verse remains operative, with the later verse specifying uncontrollable whispers if those are included; settled intentions are reckoned with, believers forgiven and disbelievers or hypocrites punished. IBNASHUR-FULL: Calling this abrogation follows early scholars' terminology; Ibn Ashur says it is clarification and specification, since adjacent verses may have been revealed at different times and believers could have feared hardship in the interval. Against: TABATABAI reporting ما ذكروه: He rejects the view that these verses respond to 2:284’s accounting for hidden thoughts, record acceptance of an impossible duty, and then abrogate it; he prefers the sūra-wide reading."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q35", "question": "What occasion and sequence of revelation are reported?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q35/p1", "position": "The believers feared 2:284, affirmed obedience, and received the closing assurance and petitions.", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting أبو هريرة: When 2:284 alarmed the Companions as beyond their capacity, the Prophet instructed them to say ‘We hear and obey’; after they accepted, God revealed 2:285–286 and replaced the burden with the limit of each soul's capacity. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas says Muslims shared Ibn ʿUmar’s distress over 2:284; 2:286 came afterward because inward whisperings exceeded their capacity, leaving the soul accountable for what it acquired in words and deeds. TAB-FULL reporting ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd reports that believers feared accountability for unacted thoughts; after they affirmed obedience rather than Israelite disobedience, revelation relieved them by limiting the matter to deeds, not thoughts in the heart. THALABI reporting ابن عمر: Ibn Umar weeps at the prospect of being taken to account for everything hidden; Ibn Abbas says Muslims shared this distress and that the capacity verse made fleeting thoughts no longer accountable unless expressed or acted on. THALABI reporting ابن عطاء والسدي وأكثر المفسرين: They say this answered believers’ fear that they could not repent of involuntary inner thoughts after 2:284; such thoughts exceeded their capacity. MAWARDI-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the Companions were told to hear, obey, and submit after 2:284; when they did, faith entered their hearts and the final verses' petitions followed. WAHIDI-ASBAB reporting المفسرون: After a year under the burden, the exegetes say the verse of capacity brought relief and was revealed in response to the Companions' distress. KASHSHAF-FULL: Wusʿ is what a person can bear without strain or distress; God assigns only what fits capacity and is manageable, below the limit of exertion. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Believers feared the reckoning in 2:284 and seek protection from forgetfulness and error beyond human control; on this reading an impossible duty is possible. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The wording could encompass passing thoughts, so the Companions were distressed until God clarified the intended scope and relieved them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: These reports support asking relief from involuntary forgetfulness and error after the believers feared the prior verse’s reckoning. DURR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas says the Companions shared Ibn ʿUmar’s distress; God then revealed 2:286, removing liability for inner whispering beyond their capacity and leaving each person accountable for acquired speech and deeds. SUYUTI-LUBAB reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayra reports that the Companions feared the burden of 2:284; the Prophet taught them to say they heard and obeyed, after which 2:285 was revealed and 2:286 lifted the burden. Muslim also transmits a similar report from Ibn Abbas. BURSEVI: After 2:284 alarmed the Companions, they knelt before the Prophet, fearing they could not bear accounting for inner thoughts. He warned against answering like earlier scriptural communities; they affirmed obedience and sought forgiveness. After 2:285 was revealed, 2:286 eased the burden: the account concerns deliberate resolve to do evil, not unavoidable passing thoughts. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting أبو هريرة، ابن عباس: In a Muslim report from Abu Hurayra and Ibn Abbas, companions feared the accountability verse, the Prophet told them to hear, obey, and submit, God strengthened their faith, and then this verse was revealed to lift the burden. TAB-FULL reporting الزهري: Al-Zuhri recounts Ibn ʿUmar’s tears and fear of being judged for inner thoughts, then Ibn ʿAbbas’s report that 2:286 relieved Muslims of that burden."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q36", "question": "What responses to the prayers are reported?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q36/p1", "position": "God answered each successive petition affirmatively.", "reasons": "MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting ابن عباس عن النبي: Ibn Abbas reports that 2:284 troubled believers; the Prophet told them to answer ‘We hear and obey,’ and God then revealed the closing passage of al-Baqara, including 2:286. MUSNAD-AHMAD reporting العلاء: Al-Ala transmits affirmative answers to the petitions against forgetfulness, burdens, and inability, then quotes the final request for pardon, mercy, and help. TAB-FULL reporting أبو هريرة: When 2:284 was revealed, people feared accountability for inner thoughts and asked the Prophet; 2:286 followed, and God answered “yes” to their petitions. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbas reports that 2:284 distressed believers; the Prophet told them to hear, obey, and submit, God strengthened their faith, then revealed 2:285 and affirmed each plea in 2:286 as fulfilled. TAB-FULL reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿid reports that believers feared being charged for thoughts they never enacted; 2:286 answered them, God said “I have done,” and this community received the closing verses uniquely. TAB-FULL reporting السدي: Al-Suddi reports that Gabriel confirmed to Muhammad after each petition in 2:286 that God had granted it. TAB-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas reports God answering each of the petitions in the final verses with قد فعلت, meaning it has been granted. TAB-FULL reporting أبو هريرة: Abu Hurayrah reports the Prophet saying that God answered the plea not to hold believers accountable for forgetfulness or error with نعم. TAB-FULL reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿid ibn Jubayr reports God affirming the supplications with قد فعلت. ZAJJAJ reporting النبي: A report says God answered each petition in this prayer with I have done so, meaning it was accepted. IBNABIHATIM reporting الحسن: After Abū Bakr al-Hudhali told him the report, al-Ḥasan affirmed it and cited this prayer as Qur'anic evidence. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās reports God's answer: I will not hold you accountable. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة: Abū Hurayra transmits the affirmative answer نعم to this plea. IBNABIHATIM reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿīd b. Jubayr likewise gives God's answer as I will not hold you accountable. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās glosses the plea as God's answer that He will not impose the burden on them; Saʿīd b. Jubayr also reports this gloss. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة: Abū Hurayra transmits the affirmative answer نعم to this plea. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās reports God's answer to the plea for forgiveness as: I have forgiven you. IBNABIHATIM reporting ابن عباس، الضحاك، محمد بن كعب، السدي: Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, Muḥammad b. Kaʿb, and al-Suddī report God's answer as: I have done so. IBNABIHATIM reporting سعيد بن جبير: Saʿīd b. Jubayr gives God's answer as: I will not 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
