<<chunk 92, part 1 of 0..5>>
ian. QURTUBI-FULL: Mawlana means our protector and helper. SAMIN-DURR: The fāʾ marks causation: because God is their protector and manages their affairs, they ask Him to grant victory over their enemies. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Mawlana means our protector and helper; believers trust and rely on God, with no power or strength except through Him. BIQAI-FULL: Biqāʿī explains mawlā as the enduring guardian who maintains care for those who entrust Him with what they cannot accomplish themselves. BIQAI-FULL: Mawlā also means the one who brings guardianship to fruition through closeness and turning toward the ward; the petition seeks bodily reward in paradise and spiritual delight in vision. BURSEVI: The plea asks God to help against disbelievers and repel their harm, as a guardian should defend those in his care; victory may come through conquest, argument, or defense. ALUSI-FULL: When mawlā and sayyid are both used, Arabic usage puts mawlā first; al-Khansāʾ's verse is cited as evidence, though Al-Alusi has reservations about the criticism of the reverse order. ALUSI-FULL: The clause may be understood as an instruction to say: You are our patron. ALUSI-FULL: The fāʾ signals causation: because God is their patron and manager, they ask Him to grant victory, like asking generosity from a generous person. IBNASHUR-FULL: The appeal to God's patronage rests on a patron's duty to treat dependents gently. IBNASHUR-FULL: The فاء derives the plea for victory from God's role as patron, since a patron is expected to aid those under his care. IBNASHUR-FULL: The request's derivation from God's established guardianship over believers strengthens its insistence and recalls 2:257. TABATABAI: Mawlā means a supporter who takes charge of the supported person's affairs, not just any helper; God is believers' guardian and protector. WAHIDI-BASIT reporting يونس: Yunus explains the Prophet's saying Whoever has me as his mawla, Ali is his mawla to mean whoever has me as his wali. WAHIDI-BASIT: The report calling Muzayna, Juhayna, Aslam, and Ghifar God's and His Messenger's mawali means they are His allies; Al-Ajjaj's verse likewise uses mawali for allies of truth."}, {"id": "2:286/q29/p2", "position": "Mawlā means master or owner.", "reasons": "THALABI: Calling God our master means asking Him as helper, protector, guardian, and patron to grant victory over the disbelievers. MAWARDI-FULL: Mawlana means either our master and owner or our protector and helper. KASHSHAF-FULL: “Our mawlā” may mean our master, since we are His servants; our helper; or the one who manages our affairs. KASHSHAF-FULL: They ask for victory because a master should aid his servants, because this is God’s customary way, or because managing their affairs is His concern. RAZI-FULL: Calling God their Mawla expresses utmost humility and dependence: God gives every blessing and honor, as a guardian tends a child or a master orders a servant’s affairs. BAYDAWI-FULL: Mawlā here means our master. BAYDAWI-FULL: The plea follows from a master’s duty to aid his clients against enemies; alternatively, “the unbelieving people” means unbelievers generally. NASAFI-FULL: Mawlā can mean our master, helper, or the one who manages our affairs. NASAFI-FULL: The request for victory follows because a master is expected to aid his servants. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Mawla derives from waliya and can function as a verbal, temporal, or locative noun; in the sense of ruler, master, helper, or kinsman it is a lexicalized noun. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The ف in فانصرنا signals causation: because God is their master and manager, they ask Him to help them against enemies and instill courage while weakening the enemy. BURSEVI: Mawlānā can mean our master while we are His servants, our helper, or the one who manages our affairs. ALUSI-FULL: Mawlānā means our owner and master, or the one who manages our affairs; it is a verbal noun used for an agent. ELMALILI: Mawlana means our patron, owner and master, guardian of our affairs, and helper; Elmalılı links it to the declaration that God is the protector of those who believe."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q30", "question": "How is مَوْلَىٰنَا formed?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q30/p1", "position": "Mawlā derives from waliya and denotes a guardian or agent.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī derives mawla as the form mafʿal from waliya; the yāʾ becomes alif because the preceding lām, the word’s second radical, is open. WAHIDI-BASIT: God is our wali by helping us and by directing our affairs; the verb is wali, yali, wilayah, making Him wali and mawla."}, {"id": "2:286/q30/p2", "position": "Calling God our mawla praises Him, draws the supplicant near, and thanks Him; mawla derives from wali and denotes guardianship.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Calling God our mawla praises Him, draws the supplicant near, and thanks Him; mawla derives from wali and denotes guardianship."}, {"id": "2:286/q30/p3", "position": "Mawla derives from waliya and can function as a verbal, temporal, or locative noun; in the sense of ruler, master, helper, or kinsman it is a lexicalized noun.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Mawla derives from waliya and can function as a verbal, temporal, or locative noun; in the sense of ruler, master, helper, or kinsman it is a lexicalized noun."}, {"id": "2:286/q30/p4", "position": "Mawlānā means our owner and master, or the one who manages our affairs; it is a verbal noun used for an agent.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: Mawlānā means our owner and master, or the one who manages our affairs; it is a verbal noun used for an agent."}, {"id": "2:286/q30/p5", "position": "The فاء derives the plea for victory from God's role as patron, since a patron is expected to aid those under his care.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The فاء derives the plea for victory from God's role as patron, since a patron is expected to aid those under his care."}, {"id": "2:286/q30/p6", "position": "The request's derivation from God's established guardianship over believers strengthens its insistence and recalls 2:257.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The request's derivation from God's established guardianship over believers strengthens its insistence and recalls 2:257."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q31", "question": "Why does فَٱنصُرْنَا follow God's patronage?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q31/p1", "position": "The fāʾ makes God's patronage the reason for asking victory.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: The repeated root with different verb forms beautifies the style, as in the contrast between fa-mahhil and amhil. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Fa-nṣurnā means “help us.” SAMIN-DURR: The author illustrates this causal appeal with “You are generous, so grant me” and “You are a hero, so protect your sanctuary.” IBNASHUR-FULL: The clause أنت مولانا is set apart as the reason for the preceding requests and as a premise for the following one."}]}
{"id": "2:286/q32", "question": "What victory and what opponents are requested?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q32/p1", "position": "The plea asks God's help against disbelievers.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL reporting معاذ: Muʿadh used to say آمين after finishing this surah at its closing request for victory over the disbelievers. ZAJJAJ: He compares the request with the hypothetical granting of silver-roofed houses to disbelievers. IBNABIHATIM reporting أبو هريرة، سعيد بن جبير، محمد بن كعب، الضحاك: Abū Hurayra, Saʿīd b. Jubayr, Muḥammad b. Kaʿb, and al-Ḍaḥḥāk are also reported to give the answer that victory was granted. THALABI reporting بعضهم: Another interpretation is that enemies gloat over the afflicted person. JISHUMI: One view asks for help against disbelievers through subjugation. JISHUMI: Their request for help against disbelievers likewise shows that they have agency. BAGHAWI-FULL: The final plea asks God to grant victory over the disbelieving people. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Victory over unbelievers enables the law to stand, the Muslim word to prevail, and the way to obedience to remain open. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The disbelievers reject God’s religion, oneness, and Messenger, worship others, and associate created beings with God; the plea asks victory and the final outcome over them in this world and the next. BIQAI-FULL: Biqāʿī says the ending implies that fighting the disbelievers is obligatory and that they are the most hostile enemies. BIQAI-FULL reporting أبو الحسن الحرالي: Al-Harali traces the surah's close from belief and wealth to support against unbelievers, linking its ending back to its beginning and viewing al-Baqara as encompassing the Qur'an's meanings. BIQAI-FULL: The surah details the decree through its opening groups of believers, unbelievers, and hypocrites, then describes their seals, illnesses, rulings, and eventual recompense. ELMALILI: Elmalılı says the forthcoming Sura of Al-i Imran begins as a response to this prayer for victory. ELMALILI: The assurance of ease is glad tidings for Muhammad’s community, whose faith, obedience, sincerity, sound will, and adherence to truth suit this gift; unbelievers do not escape duty and instead impose desire-driven, unjust demands on one another. ELMALILI: The believers ask for material and spiritual victory over unbelievers in defending the truth and raising God’s word. IBNASHUR-FULL: Victory gathers worldly and otherworldly good: it brings security and flourishing, makes the faith prevail, prevents persecution, and draws people into Islam. TABATABAI: The final request for victory over unbelievers hints that this prayer belongs to Islam’s early emergence. TABATABAI: The text moves from each person’s individual faith to the group’s rejection of division, collective burdens, and plea for victory; faith belongs to individuals, while these events concern communities. TABATABAI: The sūra opens with the pious believing the unseen, praying, giving, accepting revelation
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
