<<chunk 93, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:286/q37", "question": "What are the origin and virtues of the closing verses?", "turns_on": "The alternatives differ over the wording, scope, or evidence cited in the notes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:286/q37/p1", "position": "Reciting the closing verses at night suffices the reciter, possibly for night prayer.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting علقمة بن قيس: ʿAlqama ibn Qays says reciting the closing verses of Sūrat al-Baqara at night suffices in place of that night’s prayer vigil. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report says two verses from Paradise’s treasures were written by the Merciful before creation two thousand years earlier; reciting them after the night prayer suffices instead of night vigil. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said that reciting al-Baqara’s final two verses at night suffices the reciter. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting أبو مسعود عقبة بن عمرو: Abu Masud Uqba ibn Amr transmits that reciting the last two verses at night suffices in place of night prayer. TABRISI reporting النبي: A well-known Prophetic report says whoever recites the final two verses of al-Baqara at night is sufficed for that night's vigil. QURTUBI-FULL reporting أبو مسعود الأنصاري: Muslim transmits from Abu Masud al-Ansari that the Prophet said whoever recites the final two verses of al-Baqara at night, they suffice him. BAYDAWI-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet reported that two verses from the treasures of Paradise were written by the Merciful’s hand two thousand years before creation; reciting them after the last night prayer suffices in place of night vigil. BAYDAWI-FULL reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said that whoever recites the last two verses of Sūrat al-Baqara at night, they suffice him. NASAFI-FULL: A report says reciting the closing verses beginning «Āmana al-rasūl» at night suffices the reciter. NASAFI-FULL: Another report says reciting those two verses after the final night prayer substitutes for night vigil. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting أبو مسعود: The Prophet says that whoever recites the two closing verses of al-Baqara at night will find them sufficient; Ibn Kathir cites several transmission routes and gives no grading here. DURR-FULL reporting ابن مسعود: The Prophet said that whoever recites the final two verses of al-Baqara at night will find them sufficient. BURSEVI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report says two verses from Paradise's treasures were written by the Merciful's hand two thousand years before creation, and reciting them after the final evening prayer suffices for night vigil. BURSEVI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet says whoever recites the final two verses of al-Baqara will be sufficed, either for night prayer or for the reckoning on Judgment Day. ALUSI-FULL reporting ابن مسعود: The six canonical collections transmit from Ibn Masʿud that whoever recites the final two verses of al-Baqara at night, they suffice him. ALUSI-FULL reporting ابن مسعود الأنصاري: Ibn ʿAdi reports from Ibn Masʿud al-Ansari that two verses from the treasures of Paradise were written by God before creation; reciting them after the night prayer suffices for night worship. ELMALILI reporting İbn Mes‘ûd: A Prophetic report from Ibn Masud, included in the Kutub al-Sitta, says whoever recites the last two verses of al-Baqara at night will find them sufficient. IBNASHUR-FULL reporting أبو مسعود الأنصاري البدري: A report in the Sahih says the Prophet taught that reciting the last two verses of al-Baqara at night suffices the reciter. IBNASHUR-FULL: The sufficiency may mean the two verses replace night prayer, or that they provide blessing and protection from devils and harms; Ibn Ashur suggests both meanings are intended. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR reporting hadis: Many sound hadiths describe the merit of the sūra’s final two verses; one says they suffice at night for whoever recites them, cited from Bukhārī and Shawkānī. STUDYQURAN reporting the Prophet: The Prophet said that reciting the two verses at night suffices the reciter."}, {"id": "2:286/q37/p2", "position": "The closing verses came from a treasure beneath the Throne or a precreation book.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting الحسن: Al-Ḥasan reports that God bestowed the closing verses of Sūrat al-Baqara on the Prophet as treasures from the Throne. THALABI reporting مسروق: Masruq calls Surat al-Baqara and Ali Imran a poor person's treasure when recited late at night. MAWARDI-FULL reporting عقبة بن عامر الجهني: Uqba ibn Amir al-Juhani reports that the Prophet urged recitation of the final two verses of al-Baqara, which God gave him from beneath the Throne. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting علي: Ali says al-Baqara’s closing verses are a treasure beneath the Throne. KASHSHAF-FULL reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said he was given al-Baqara’s closing verses from a treasure beneath the Throne, a gift no prior prophet received. IBNATIYYA-FULL reporting النبي: The Prophet says he received the final verses from a treasure beneath the Throne, a gift no one before him received. QURTUBI-FULL reporting النبي: The Prophet said these closing verses came from a treasure beneath the Throne and were not given to any prophet before him. NASAFI-FULL reporting على: ʿAlī is cited as saying that the closing verses of al-Baqara are a treasure from beneath the Throne. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting أبو ذر: Abu Dharr reports the Prophet saying that he received the closing verses of al-Baqara from a treasure beneath the Throne, a gift given to no prophet before him. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting عقبة بن عامر الجهني: The Prophet tells Uqba ibn Amir to recite the final two verses of al-Baqara, saying they were given from beneath the Throne; Ibn Kathir calls the chain hasan, though the major collections do not include it. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting حذيفة: Hudhayfa reports the Prophet saying that his community was favored with these verses from a treasure beneath the Throne, given to no one before or after him. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting علي: Ali says that no person who understands Islam should go to sleep without reciting the closing verses, a treasure granted to the Prophet from beneath the Throne. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting علي: In another transmission Ali adds Ayat al-Kursi to the nightly recitation of the closing verses, describing both as a treasure beneath the Throne. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas reports that the Prophet laughed when reciting the closing verses and Ayat al-Kursi, saying they are from the Merciful's treasure beneath the Throne; reciting 4:123 and 53:39–41 instead made him grieve and submit. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting معقل بن يسار: The Prophet says he was given the Opening of the Book and the closing verses of al-Baqara from beneath the Throne, while the Mufassal was given as an extra voluntary portion. ALUSI-FULL reporting أبو ذر: Al-Hakim, who authenticates it, and al-Bayhaqi report from Abu Dharr that the final verses were granted from beneath the Throne and should be taught to wives and children as prayer, Qur'an, and supplication. ELMALILI reporting Ebû Zer: Abu Dharr’s report, cited by Hakim and Bayhaqi, says the Prophet received the surah’s final two verses from a treasure beneath the Throne and urged people to learn and teach them as prayer, Qur’an, and supplication. STUDYQURAN reporting the Prophet: A report says the Prophet received the two verses sealing the sūrah from a treasury beneath the Throne."}, {"id": "2:286/q37/p3", "position": "Reciting the closing verses protects a home or reader from Satan.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ reporting أبو قلابة: Abū Qilāba says that whoever recites the closing verses of al-Baqara keeps Satan out of the home for three days. TAB-FULL: Ṭabarī explains God as the believers’ ally and defender: they believe and obey, while He is faithful to the obedient and opposed to disbelievers; they ask victory as His party against those denying His oneness, worshipping rivals, and obeying Satan. KASHSHAF-FULL: The passage about Moses’ companion says Satan caused him to forget; Satan cannot directly cause forgetting but whispers, leading to the negligence that causes it. QURTUBI-FULL: Another explanation is that the verses suffice against Satan’s harm, so he has no power over the reader. QURTUBI-FULL reporting حذيفة بن اليمان: Al-Dani transmits from Hudhayfa ibn al-Yaman that a book was written before creation and three closing verses from it were revealed; reciting them at home keeps Satan away for three nights. IBNKATHIR-FULL reporting النعمان بن بشير: The Prophet says God wrote a book two thousand years before creating the heavens and earth, sent down from it the two verses ending al-Baqara, and that a house where they are recited is not approached by Satan for three nights. Al-Tirmidhi calls the report gharīb; al-Hakim calls it sahih by Muslim's standard, though they did not include it. DURR-FULL reporting النعمان بن بشير: The Prophet said God wrote a book two thousand years before creating heaven and earth, revealed two of its verses to close al-Baqara, and Satan does not approach a house where they are recited for three nights. BURSEVI reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet urges learning al-Baqara as a blessing, says abandoning it brings regret and sorcerers cannot master it, and the report links a house without its recitation for three nights with Satan's approach. ALUSI-FULL reporting شداد بن أوس: Al-Tabarani, with a good chain, reports from Shaddad ibn Aws that God wrote a book two thousand years before creating heaven and earth, and the final two verses protect a home from Satan for three nights. IBNASHUR-FULL: Choosing the form that can imply compliance for evil suggests Satan commands and the soul obeys, disfavoring sins; using kasaba for good suggests God guides people to it by innate disposition. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Although believers might expect humanity to embrace this accessible religion, testing through reason, wil
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
