<<chunk 97, part 3 of 0..5>>
606 citing الذين قرؤا بالتشديد: They also argue that rabbānīs must teach as well as know; the command to Muhammad to call with wisdom supports this, and Murra ibn Sharāḥīl called ʿAlqama one of the teachers of Qur'an. | mentions 16:125 RAZI-FULL, d. 606: In either reading, mā plus the verb is a verbal noun: learning, teaching, and studying Scripture are the grounds for becoming rabbānī. | mentions 7:5 RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Learning, teaching, and studying make a person rabbānī only when pursued for this purpose; otherwise the work is wasted, like a beautiful tree with useless fruit. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās explains rabbānī as one who teaches people elementary knowledge before advanced knowledge, modeling God's gentle ordering of affairs. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: Another explanation calls rabbānīs scholars who teach; the source also defines a rabbānī as a learned person who acts on knowledge. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing البخاري: Al-Bukhārī gives a definition of rabbānī as someone who teaches people small matters of knowledge before great ones. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj defines rabbānī as a teacher. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The causative reading intensifies the praise: every teacher is learned, not every learned person teaches, and rabbani suggests teaching others rather than private knowledge alone. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, through Sa'id ibn Jubayr, glosses rabbaniyyin as jurists and teachers. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The bi-phrases explain why people should become rabbānī: they persist in teaching scripture and studying it; knowledge must be joined to practice, since neither alone counts. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Elmalılı renders the verse as denying prophets any right to demand worship, while their proper task is to raise rabbānīs through teaching and study. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Rabbaniyyun occurs twice elsewhere beside ahbar, referring to Jewish scholars charged with preserving Torah rulings, teaching them, and ensuring Jews live by them. | mentions 5:44, 5:63"}, {"id": "3:79/q16/p2", "position": "Learned jurist or wise scholar", "reasons": "JISHUMI, d. 494 citing بعض قريش: A Qurayshi saying illustrates rabbānī as managing or raising someone: the speaker would rather be managed by a Qurayshi than a man from Hawazin. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 citing أبو عبيدة: Abu ʿUbayda transmits a scholar's definition: a rabbani knows lawful and forbidden matters, commands and prohibitions, and the community's history and future. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 citing علي وابن عباس والحسن: Ali, Ibn Abbas, and al-Hasan define rabbaniyyun as jurists and learned scholars. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 citing قتادة: Qatada defines rabbaniyyun as wise scholars. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 citing سعيد بن جبير: Saʿid ibn Jubayr defines a rabbani as a scholar who acts on his knowledge. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 citing الحسن: Al-Hasan defines rabbānī people as learned jurists. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542: Ibn ʿAṭiyya sums up a rabbānī as learned in God and the law, and sound in judging words and actions undertaken among people. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 citing أبو رزين: Abū Razīn defines a rabbānī as a wise scholar. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 citing مجاهد: Mujāhid defines a rabbānī as a jurist. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 citing قتادة وغيره: Qatāda and others define a rabbānī as learned and forbearing. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 citing ابن عباس: Ibn ʿAbbās defines a rabbānī as wise and learned in jurisprudence. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 citing الضحاك: Al-Ḍaḥḥāk defines a rabbānī as a jurist and scholar. TABRISI, d. 548 citing علي وابن عباس والحسن: They interpret rabbaniyyun as learned jurists. TABRISI, d. 548 citing قتادة والسدي وابن أبي رزين: They interpret rabbaniyyun as learned and wise people. TABRISI, d. 548 citing رجل عالم: A learned man, quoted by Abu Ubayda, defines a rabbani as someone who knows lawful and unlawful matters, commands, prohibitions, and past and future events. TABRISI, d. 548: A second explanation takes the preposition to mean being rabbani in one’s learning and study. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 citing علي بن أبي طالب: Ali defines rabbaniyyun as people who nourish others with wisdom and train them in it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 citing قتادة، عطاء: Qatada and Ata define them as jurists, scholars, and wise people. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 citing رجل عالم بالكتب: A learned man in the scriptures defines rabbaniyyun as scholars of the lawful and unlawful, commands and prohibitions. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 citing عبد الله بن كثير وأبو عمرو ونافع: These readers read the verb as knowing: people become rabbānīs through their own knowledge of Scripture. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: A rabbānī is a scholar of God's religion who acts on his knowledge; without acting on it, a person is not truly a scholar. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing أبو رزين: Abū Razīn defines rabbānī as a learned, wise person. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing ابن مسعود: Ibn Masʿūd's gloss is that rabbāniyyūn are wise scholars. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing الضحاك: Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says no one should neglect memorizing as much of the Qur'an as possible, citing the command to be rabbānī. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing العالم: Abū ʿUbayda quotes a scholar defining rabbānī as one who knows lawful and forbidden matters, commands and prohibitions, and the community's reports, past and future. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: A prophet may instead tell people to become rabbāniyyūn. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 citing الحسن: Al-Ḥasan explains rabbānī as learned scholars and jurists. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing المبرد: Al-Mubarrad defines rabbānī as a scholar. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing ابن عطية: Ibn ʿAṭiyya summarizes rabbānī as a scholar who judges accurately in words and actions undertaken among people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing قتادة وأبو رزين: Qatāda and Abū Razīn define rabbānī as a wise scholar; Qatāda and others also describe the quality as scholarly gentleness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing علي وابن عباس والحسن ومجاهد: ʿAlī, Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Ḥasan, and Mujāhid define rabbānī as a jurist; other formulations call the person a wise jurist or a learned jurist. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: كونوا requires an implied يقول; ربانيون is its plural subject complement. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 citing ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, Abu Razin, and others explain rabbaniyyun as people who are wise, learned, and forbearing. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 citing الحسن: Hasan and others interpret rabbaniyyun as jurists; this is also reported from Ibn Abbas, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Qatada, Ata al-Khurasani, Atiyya al-Awfi, and al-Rabi ibn Anas. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, through Ikrima, says rabbaniyyin are forbearing, learned, and wise. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, through al-Dahhak, defines rabbaniyyin as learned jurists. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, through al-Awfi, defines rabbaniyyin as wise jurists. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing ابن مسعود: Ibn Masud glosses rabbaniyyin as wise scholars. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing الضحاك: Al-Dahhak says no man or woman, free or enslaved, is excused from learning as much Quran as possible; becoming rabbani means becoming a jurist and scholar. ITQAN, d. 911: Rabbaniyyin means learned jurists. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 citing علي: ʿAlī and Ibn ʿAbbās define rabbānī as a learned jurist. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 citing قتادة: Qatāda and al-Suddī define rabbānī as a wise scholar. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 citing ابن زيد: Ibn Zayd defines rabbānī as one who manages the affairs of people; the author says these definitions are close. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The prophetic counsel is summarized as “Be rabbaniyyun.” STUDYQURAN: The commentary directs readers to 5:43–44 for further discussion of rabbāniyyūn. | mentions 5:43, 5:44"}, {"id": "3:79/q16/p3", "position": "God-devoted and pious", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548: The implied contrast is that a prophet should tell people to become rabbaniyyun rather than worship him. TABRISI, d. 548 citing سعيد بن جبير: He interprets rabbaniyyun as wise and God-fearing people. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 citing ابن جبير: Ibn Jubayr defines rabbāniyyūn as wise and God-fearing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing المؤرج: Al-Muʾarrij defines rabbānī as one who repents to his Lord. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī defines rabbānī as one firmly attached to God's religion and obedience. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing عطاء: ʿAṭāʾ defines rabbānī as a learned, wise person who sincerely seeks the good of God's creatures. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 citing ابن جبير: Ibn Jubayr defines rabbānī both as wise and pious and as a scholar who acts on his knowledge. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 citing سيبويه: Sibawayh explains the extra letters in رباني as specifying mastery of knowledge of the Lord, analogous to شعراني، لحياني, and رقباني. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 citing الحسن: Hasan also explains rabbaniyyun as people devoted to worship and piety. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: A rabbānī is strongly attached to God's religion and obedience. DURR-FULL, d. 911 citing سعيد بن جبير: Sa'id ibn Jubayr says rabbaniyyin are wise and God-fearing. BURSEVI, d. 1127: A rabbani is complete in knowledge and action and firmly adheres to obedience, God’s religion, and knowledge of God. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 citing ابن جبير: Ibn Jubayr defines rabbānī as wise and God-fearing. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Be godly means be affiliated with the Lord, God, an affiliation that implies special attachment; the intended sense is to be sincere to God alone. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 citing Sibawayh (as quoted by Razi): A rabbani is one devoted exclusively to knowing the Sustainer and obeying Him, a meaning close to man of God. STUDYQURAN citing some: Rabbāniyyūn, translated “sages,” is variously understood as wise, knowledgeable, pious, or eminent religious scholars who know the lawful and forbidden. | mentions 5:44"}, {"id": "3:79/q16/p4", "position": "Ibn Abbas as exemplar", "reasons": "TUSTARI: Ibn Abbas as exemplar (as recorded by TUSTARI). THALABI: Ibn Abbas as exemplar (as recorded by THALABI). BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 citing محمد بن الحنفية: When Ibn Abbas di
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
