<<chunk 99, part 4 of 0..5>>
 and poor people. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Christian preaching offered fraternity, love, equality, kind social relations, rejection of worldly life, and hope for the pure happy life of heaven. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Because they did not initially threaten rulers' interests, kings and emperors generally did not target the missionaries with full force. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Christian numbers and strength steadily increased across Rome, Africa, India, and other lands as churches opened and pagan temples closed. TABATABAI, d. 1402: They avoided direct contests with pagan leaders and rulers but faced killing, imprisonment, torture, and exile when their noncompliance provoked authorities. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author dates Constantine's conversion and Christianity's official establishment, with church building across Rome's empire, to the latter half of the fourth century. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The Roman church then sent priests to dependent regions to build churches, monasteries, and schools for Gospel teaching."}, {"id": "3:79/q37/p3", "position": "Church branches and political authority", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: The eastern emperors claimed religious authority independently of Rome after the Roman Empire split, producing the Catholic and Orthodox branches. TABATABAI, d. 1402: After the Ottomans captured Constantinople and killed its last emperor, Russian rulers claimed succession to church leadership through family ties; Russia's church remained outside Rome. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says that after the last Russian tsar and his family were killed by communists in 1918, the Church of Rome nearly returned to its pre-schism position. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says medieval church efforts to control all aspects of life triggered popular religious resistance to its restrictions. TABATABAI, d. 1402: One group left obedience to popes and church leaders while remaining under Gospel teaching as interpreted by its own councils and clergy; the author calls them Orthodox. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Another group left Rome's church and authority over Gospel teaching; the author calls them Protestants. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He summarizes three branches: Catholics follow Rome and its teaching, Orthodox follow church teaching apart from Rome, and Protestants reject both; he dates their independence to the fifteenth century. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author explains that this history is included to help readers trace historical changes and possible pagan influence on Christian doctrine through inheritance, transmission, mixture, or habit. TABATABAI, d. 1402: A second purpose is to show the medieval church, especially Rome, gaining spiritual and political dominance over European rulers, including power to depose and appoint them."}, {"id": "3:79/q37/p4", "position": "Church councils and imperial adoption", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: A true religion cannot contain an intrinsically impossible doctrine: reason distinguishes true religion, though a religion may include a possible event that breaks ordinary nature's laws. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says treating rationally impossible teachings as axioms caused early Christian disputes in Rome, Alexandria, and other schools. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The church tried to enforce doctrinal unity by convening councils for new teachings and condemning, exiling, expelling, or killing those who remained unconvinced. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing أريوس: Arius taught that the Son was not equal to the Father, that God alone was eternal, and that Christ was created. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says the Council of Nicaea met under Constantine with 313 bishops and adopted a creed calling Jesus uncreated true God, incarnate, crucified, risen, and returning to judge, alongside belief in the Holy Spirit, one baptism, church, resurrection, and eternal life. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The church later convened many councils to reject groups including Nestorians, Jacobites, Arians, and other named doctrinal movements. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The church gradually brought most European peoples and kingdoms into Christianity; the account says Russia converted near the end of the fifth century, in 496. TABATABAI, d. 1402: As northern invasions and wars weakened emperors, Roman subjects handed temporal as well as religious rule to the church, combining both powers in Pope Gregory in 590."}, {"id": "3:79/q37/p5", "position": "Modern aftermath of Pauline Christianity", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī traces Christian pagan doctrines to excessive exaltation of Jesus, culminating in Trinity, crucifixion and atonement, and the sufficiency of belief over works. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Christian practice first bound followers to the church through fasting, prayer, and baptism; secular law and materialism later weakened religious teaching and eroded morals. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He says communism and socialism, built on dialectical materialism, reject divinity, fixed moral virtues, and religious acts, leaving a materialistic, animalized humanity. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He characterizes recent religious revivals as political performances used by politicians to pursue their aims. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing جوزف شيتلر: Schittler says America's new religious revival applies religion to modern civic life to show that modern civilization does not oppose religion, risking complacency about possessing the true faith. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing جورج فلوروفسكي: Florovsky calls American religious instruction a false comfort; a living, genuine revival would have to rest on deep, realistic instruction. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He concludes that the movement began by restoring belief, morals, virtues, and religious law but ended by replacing all with sensual enjoyment, a development from Paul's original deviation. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He argues that present civilization, which threatens humanity, would more credibly be called Pauline civilization than civilization led by Christ."}, {"id": "3:79/q37/p6", "position": "Medieval Christian polemics against Muslims", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author recounts stories that a pope made a German emperor stand barefoot outside his palace in winter for three days and kicked a king's crown when he knelt for pardon. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says crusading Christians depicted Muslims as idolaters to rally followers, claiming they worshipped three named gods and sometimes two more, and that Muhammad claimed divinity or had a golden idol. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The reported Christian polemic names Mahum, Ilīn, and Tarphagan as Muslim gods, sometimes adds Martuan and Jupin, and attributes a golden idol to Muhammad. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing ريشار: Richard's poem urges the Franks to throw Mahumand and Tarphagan into fire as an offering to their God. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing رولان: The Song of Roland portrays Mahum as a huge, finely crafted gold-and-silver idol on an elephant, jeweled and glittering. TABATABAI, d. 1402: A poem claims Muslims' gods came to help in battle; after a Muslim defeat, a commander sent for Muhammad from Mecca, and a crowd brought him amid music and dancing while his caliph awaited and worshipped him. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing ريشار: Richard's poem says sorcerers put a jinn inside the idol Mahum, where it first roared and then spoke to listening Muslims."}]}
{"id": "3:79/q38", "question": "How should scripture and transmitted reports be interpreted?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "3:79/q38/p1", "position": "Reasoned exegesis beyond transmission", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: A warning against interpretation should prompt careful reflection and reject haste; scholars differ in this, and some carry scrupulous caution to excess. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: If transmission means early material from Ibn Abbas’s and Ibn Masud’s students, successors’ unattributed, differing interpretations still show they reasoned independently, as seen in al-Tabari and similar works. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 citing الطبري: Although al-Tabari sets out to restrict himself to Companion and Successor reports, he repeatedly selects and prefers interpretations using evidence from Arabic, thus going beyond that limit. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 citing بقي بن مخلد: Baqi ibn Makhlad preceded al-Tabari’s approach, though Ibn Ashur says his tafsir has not been seen; Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Mardawayh, and al-Hakim followed a similar path. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ibn Ashur praises exegetes who did not confine themselves to transmitted material: al-Farra and Abu Ubayda, then al-Zajjaj and al-Rummani, and later al-Zamakhshari and Ibn Atiyya. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 citing الأصمعي: Al-Asma'i refused to explain Quranic vocabulary: he would not say أسرى and سرى or أعصفت and عصفت were equivalent, nor add to his heard definition of خليل as pure, firm affection. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ibn Ashur says that outside the fundamentals of belief, God requires reasoned probability supported by evidence, with suitable evidence varying by subject; the principles of understanding speech are known. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ibn Ashur rejects the slogan that Quran interpretation must be confined to transmitted material because its advocates have not defined what counts as transmitted. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: If transmission means only sound or fair Prophetic explanations, the restriction narrows Quranic meanings, contradicts their own tafsirs, and falsely implies early Muslim imams limited themselves to Prophetic reports. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 citing عمر بن الخطاب: Umar asked learned people about the meanings of many verses without requiring them to cite a Prophetic explanation. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: If transmission includes only the Prophet and Companions, as al-Suyuti’s al-Durr al-Manthur appears to do, the material remains too scant to sustain tafsir. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 citing علي بن أبي طالب: Ibn Ashur says little tafsir is transmitted from most Companions; reports from Ali vary in soundness, and Ali said he had no extra 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
