<<chunk 99, part 3 of 0..5>>
w dates John’s Gospel to 65 CE. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing قائل: Other reported dates for John’s Gospel are 96 and 98 CE. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing بعضهم: Christian writers disagree on the date of John's Gospel, giving 65, 96, or 98 CE. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing بعضهم: Some Christians say the Gospel of John was written by a student at the school of Alexandria rather than by John the disciple. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing بعضهم: Others say John did not write the Gospel or letters attributed to him; another author composed them in the early second century and attached John's name to gain acceptance. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing بعضهم: Another account says John's Gospel originally had twenty chapters and the church of Ephesus added the twenty-first after John's death. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī says all support for the four Gospels ultimately rests on seven men—Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, Paul, and Judas—and on Matthew, the earliest Gospel, whose Hebrew original and translator are unknown. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The existing Matthew account says Jesus was born without a human father, was sent by God to redeem sins through crucifixion, performed miracles, and had twelve disciples including Matthew."}, {"id": "3:79/q36/p2", "position": "Torah's history and interrupted transmission", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: The Qur'an implies that some authentic Torah remains with Jews and some authentic Gospel with Christians, citing their Torah's possession of God's judgment and Christians' loss of part of what they were reminded of. | mentions 5:43, 5:14 TABATABAI, d. 1402: The Israelites, tribes descended from Jacob, began as nomads and were taken to Egypt, where Pharaoh treated them as enslaved prisoners until Moses saved them. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Moses and then Joshua led the Israelites; for a period afterward judges such as Ehud and Gideon governed them. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The monarchy began with Saul, whom the Qur'an calls Talut, then David and Solomon; after the kingdom split, more than thirty rulers followed. | mentions 2:247 TABATABAI, d. 1402: Babylonian kings took Jerusalem around 600 BCE; after Zedekiah rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon's forces besieged the city. TABATABAI, d. 1402: After a siege of roughly a year and a half, Babylon captured Jerusalem in 586 BCE, killed inhabitants, destroyed the Temple, and the Torah and Ark disappeared. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The Israelites remained in Babylon for about fifty years with no trace of their book, Temple, or homes. TABATABAI, d. 1402: After Cyrus conquered Babylon, he released the Israelite captives and appointed his associate Ezra to lead them, write their Torah, rebuild the Temple, and restore their former way of life; Ezra returned to Jerusalem in 457 BCE. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Ezra collected and corrected the Old Testament books, producing the Torah in circulation today, whose transmission to Moses is interrupted except for Ezra. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī questions Ezra's identity, learning, trustworthiness, sources, and basis for correcting errors, arguing the Torah's chain to Moses cannot be verified. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing باحثي المؤرخين من الغربيين: Some Western historians denied that Moses existed and called him imaginary, as they did Jesus; al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī says a Muslim cannot accept this because the Qurʾan affirms Moses. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī observes that Jews carefully documented their national history and major events. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Despite that historical care, Jewish writings do not mention the birth, ministry, miracles, life, or death of Jesus. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He asks whether Jesus story was hidden from Jews or whether they concealed it. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The Qurʾan says Jews slandered Mary and claimed to kill Jesus, while denying that they killed or crucified him. | mentions 4:156, 4:157"}, {"id": "3:79/q36/p3", "position": "Historical sources about Jesus", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: Christians cannot deny that the common-era calendar does not align with Jesus's birth, which al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī calls a historical silence. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He says more than a hundred Gospels were written in the first two centuries, but the church deemed only four canonical and prohibited the rest because their contents suited church doctrine. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The excluded Gospel of Barnabas appeared in a manuscript in recent years and, in Arabic and Persian translation, agrees broadly with the Qur'an's account of Jesus. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī says non-Jewish historical sources are also silent about the Christian claims of divine sonship and ransom. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing هندريك ويلم وان لون: Citing van Loon, the author recounts a letter supposedly written by Roman physician Aesculapius Cultellus in 62 CE to his nephew Gladius Ansa, a soldier stationed in Palestine. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing إسكو لابيوس كولتلوس: In the letter, the physician says Paul visited him in Rome, impressed him with Christian preaching and stories of Jesus, then was later reported killed on the Ostia road; he asks his nephew to investigate both men. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing جلاديوس أنسا: The nephew replies from Jerusalem six weeks later that local elders could not answer his questions about Jesus, but an olive seller directed him to Joseph, an elderly former fisherman and follower said to know Jesus's story. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing يوسف: Joseph's account places Pontius Pilate as governor of Samaria and Judea under Tiberius and says he came to Jerusalem to suppress unrest sparked by a carpenter's son from Nazareth preaching and rousing people against the government."}]}
{"id": "3:79/q37", "question": "What history of Christianity is recounted?", "turns_on": "The notes give different senses, referents, readings, or explanations for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "3:79/q37/p1", "position": "Alternative account of Jesus and early preaching", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: Jewish religious leaders opposed Jesus and accused him to Pilate of teaching that just, compassionate non-Jews could stand equal before God to scripture readers. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Pilate chose to seize and imprison Jesus to keep the crowd from killing him in its tumult. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Pilate could not establish the reason for the accusations: people shouted labels such as unbeliever, heretic, and traitor without explaining the case. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Jesus told Pilate that he sought no political power, valued spiritual life above bodily life, urged kindness, and worshipped the one God as Father of living creatures. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Experienced in Stoic and other Greek philosophy, Pilate found no fault in Jesus' account and again resolved to save him from the Jews. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Jewish leaders spread that Pilate had been deceived by Jesus and was betraying Caesar, seeking his removal amid earlier unrest in Palestine. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Because imperial forces were weak and officials were expected to avoid public complaints, Pilate yielded to the crowd's demand for Jesus' execution as a public-order measure. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Jesus faced death without fear, forgave the Jews who caused it, and was crucified while people mocked and insulted him. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing جلاديوس أنسا: Ansa says Yusuf recounted Jesus' story to him while weeping. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He says trinity, incarnation, and a divine being's suffering as ransom were known among ancient peoples across Asia, Egypt, Persia, and the West. TABATABAI, d. 1402 citing دوان: Duan says the most famous Hindu theological worship was the trimurti: Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva as three inseparable forms of one god. TABATABAI, d. 1402: In Ansa's account, Yusuf refused a gold gift and told him to give it to someone poorer. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Yusuf knew little about Paul beyond that he was a tentmaker who left his trade to preach a new faith in a merciful, compassionate God, unlike the Jewish image of Yahweh. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The account says Paul first traveled to Asia Minor and then Greece, teaching slaves that they were all children of a loving Father. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Paul's message, as summarized here, made shared happiness available to poor and rich who lived in brotherhood, purity, and friendship. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī infers that the cited account presents Christianity after Jesus as a prophetic mission from God, not God appearing in human form and redeeming people through atonement. TABATABAI, d. 1402: After the crucifixion, Jesus' disciples and later adherents, including Paul, spread Christianity in India, Africa, Rome, and other lands. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Christian groups disagreed over Christ's divinity, whether faith in him replaced Mosaic law, and whether the Gospel superseded or supplemented Torah. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author argues that peoples first reached by Christian preaching already held pagan, mystical, or Brahmanical ideas of divine incarnation and trinity, including sacrificial redemption."}, {"id": "3:79/q37/p2", "position": "Missionary spread and rational disputes", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says Christian preachers rejected rational argument because critics demanded reasoned grounds, and instead appealed to mystical disclosure and fullness of the Holy Spirit, like Sufis claiming a way beyond reason. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The author says church scholarship weakened itself by treating Father, Son, Spirit, crucifixion, and atonement as unquestionable premises; a sound superstructure cannot repair a weak foundation. TABATABAI, d. 1402: He argues that trinity and atonement are irrational, and rejects the defense that impossible doctrines should be accepted as religious mysteries. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Missionaries became ascetics and traveled widely, as recounted in Acts and historical works. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Their success, especially in Rome, came partly from widespread injustice, enslavement, and sharp divisions between rulers
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
