<<chunk 110, part 3 of 0..5>>
ammad ibn Ka'b says asaf means intense anger. BURSEVI (author): Moses returned from Mount Sinai intensely angry; the word asaf means anger, as in “when they angered Us.” God had informed him during the conversation that his people worshipped the calf. | mentions 43:55 ALUSI-FULL (أبو الدرداء ومحمد القرظي وعطاء والزجاج): They take أسفا to mean intense anger, while other authorities take it to mean sorrow. STUDYQURAN (author): Asifan can mean sadness as well as intense anger. WAHIDI-BASIT (الأعشى): Al-A'sha uses asif for anger, picturing a man as if his severed hand were stained with blood. SAMIN-DURR (author): أسف describes an established, settled quality, while أسف on the فاعل pattern is used for a temporary state. BURHAN (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains غضبان أسفا as “enraged.” ELMALILI (Ebu’d-Derdâ): Abu al-Darda and many exegetes prefer the sense of intense anger, since the passage centers on Moses’ anger. ELMALILI (author): Elmalılı favors the intense-anger reading in context, rendering the phrase as Moses returning angry and extremely angry. SAMIN-DURR (author): Al-Aʿshā's description of a man as أسيف uses the word in the sense of angry."}, {"id": "7:150/q02/p2", "position": "Grief or sadness", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Suddī glosses asaf as sadness. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: asaf means sadness here but anger in 43:55. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses asaf as grief. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi specifically glosses asaf as grief over the calf worship. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس، السدي، الحسن): Ibn Abbas, al-Suddi, and al-Hasan explain asaf as grief; al-Kalbi gives the same sense. TABRISI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās explains asaf as grief. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Asaf means grief here, as in Jacob's lament for Joseph. | mentions 12:84 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): One explanation of asaf is grief; al-Hasan and al-Suddi share this view. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن والسدي): Ibn Abbas, al-Hasan, and al-Suddi also interpret asaf as grief; Aisha described Abu Bakr as asif, meaning sorrowful. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Asifan means intensely angry, or it may mean sorrowful. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Asaf means grief; the verb is used as “he grieved.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن والسدي): Ibn Abbas, al-Hasan, and al-Suddi interpret asaf as sorrowful. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري وابن عطية): Al-Zamakhshari and Ibn Atiyya say asaf can mean grieving or intensely angry, and it most often means sorrowful. SAMIN-DURR (author): أسف can also mean grief; a poem describing a time passing in sorrow illustrates the meaning. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains asaf as grief or sadness. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة): Ibn Abbas, al-Hasan, and Qatada are reported to understand أسفا as sorrow. IBNABIHATIM (author): Hasan and Malik ibn Dinar: sorrow. WAHIDI-BASIT (عائشة): Aisha called Abu Bakr an asif, an example of the word's grief sense. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd defines asif as one who is quick to grief and melancholy. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says Moses was sad because of what his people did after he left them. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس والسدي): They explain that Moses returned saddened by what his people had done. SAMIN-DURR (author): A hadith calls Abū Bakr a man أسيف, meaning grieved."}, {"id": "7:150/q02/p3", "position": "The word can bear both anger and grief", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abbas: asaf can mean anger or grief, anger in 43:55. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): أسف can mean intense anger, though it most often means grief; both senses fit here. TABRISI (author): Asaf can mean anger tinged with regret over what passed, grief, or yearning; khalafa means acting after someone either well or badly; haste is doing something before its proper time, whereas speed is doing it at the first possible time. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الواحدي): Al-Wahidi says the meanings of asaf are close: what comes from someone below angers, while what comes from someone above causes grief. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas gives asaf two senses, anger and grief; in 43:55, the related form means they angered God. | mentions 43:55 ELMALILI (author): Elmalılı says esef can mean either intense anger or grief, depending on whether the disliked event comes from an inferior or superior; for Moses it denotes anger toward his people and grief before God. | mentions 43:55 TABATABAI (author): Asaf means intense anger and grief; khilafa is taking up a predecessor's responsibility, and ʿajala means seeking something before its proper time, following al-Raghib's definition. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): A cited line says that the grieving person is akin to a person of anger, illustrating the closeness of the two states. SAMIN-DURR (الواحدي): Al-Wāḥidī cites a verse associating a grieving person with an angry person, evidence that the two senses are close."}, {"id": "7:150/q02/p4", "position": "Distress or anguish", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid explains asaf as distress. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets asaf as distress or agitation. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets asaf as distress or anguish. ELMALILI (author): He defines esef as a state caused by something displeasing: when it comes from above it produces grief and constriction, and when from below it produces anger and agitation. IBNABIHATIM (author): Mujahid: deeply distressed. TABRISI (author): Moses returned from his meeting with God, saw his people devoted to the calf, and was angry and distressed. QURTUBI-FULL (محمد): The Prophet sought refuge from an evil decree, distress, and the gloating of enemies; Qurtubi says al-Bukhārī and others recorded it."}, {"id": "7:150/q02/p5", "position": "Regret or yearning over what has passed", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba glosses asaf as remorse. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Asaf is intense sorrow and yearning over something. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (ابن فارس): Ibn Fāris says asifa means yearning or grief, while asaf can also mean anger. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba gives angered and regretful as additional meanings of asaf. MAWARDI-FULL (علي بن عيسى): Asaf can mean regret over what has passed."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q03", "question": "What caused Moses' anger and sorrow?", "turns_on": "Whether the two states concern calf worship, the people's trial, Moses' own departure, or lost divine communion.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q03/p1", "position": "The people's calf worship caused Moses' anger.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Moses returned angry and sorrowful over calf worship, already informed by God on the Mount. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: anger at calf worship made Moses seize Aaron and throw tablets. SULAMI (author): Some: anger at people violating command. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Moses threw the tablets in anger when he saw the people worshipping the calf. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One reading is that Moses was angry with his people for worshipping the calf and grieved over missing his communion with God. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Moses was angry at his people for worshipping the calf and grieved because God had tested them. | mentions 20:85 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses returned angry and sorrowful because God had tested them; he condemned them for making the calf a god and disbelieving God. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن إسحاق): A report says that near Israel’s camp Moses heard idle voices, then became angry and grieved when he confirmed they were devoted to calf worship, and threw the tablets. IBNATIYYA-FULL (سعيد بن جبير عن ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says Moses threw the tablets because he was angry at the Israelites’ calf worship and at Aaron for neglecting to stop them. TABRISI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says Moses cast the tablets because he was overcome by anger and distress at his people worshipping the calf. TABRISI (الشيخ المفيد أبو عبد الله بن النعمان): Another explanation is that Moses displayed anger at the people's apostasy and pain at their misguidance to show its gravity and deter similar conduct later. TABRISI (author): Another explanation is that Moses was angry because his people worshipped the calf and grieved over missing his meeting with God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): One account says Moses threw the tablets in anger on seeing the people worship the calf. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Aaron asks Moses not to count him among the wrongdoers in his anger and punishment of him; the wrongdoers are the calf worshippers. RAZI-FULL (author): Aaron feared ignorant Israelites would think Moses was angry with him as with the calf worshippers; they had ignored Aaron’s warning and nearly killed him. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi combines the senses: Moses was angry at the people for worshipping the calf and grieved that God had tested them. | mentions 20:85 QURTUBI-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr explains that Moses threw the tablets from anger and grief when he saw the people worshipping the calf and his brother had let matters go unmanaged; seeing is not like hearing. NASAFI-FULL (author): He took Aaron by the hair on his head and dragged him in anger because Aaron did not stop the calf worship, rebuking him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The calf worship angered Moses, while God's having tested his people grieved him, as God had already told him. | mentions 20:85 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Moses returned from his communion with God to his people angry and sorrowful; when he confirmed their devotion to the calf, he cast down the tablets. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A report says Moses heard the Israelites' sounds near their camp, called them idle people, then became angry and sorrowful when he found them worshiping the calf. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent explanation is that Moses seized Aaron in anger at his failure to prevent calf worship despite being appointed over the Israelites and commanded to reform them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The tablets were the Torah; Moses, carrying them, set them down in anger at the calf worship and zeal for God's religion. IBNKATHIR-FULL (جمهور العلماء سلفا وخلفا): The apparent sequence is 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
