<<chunk 111, part 3 of 0..5>>
20:86"}, {"id": "7:150/q11/p2", "position": "They hastened God's wrath or judgment by their conduct.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other interpretations take the question to mean that they hastened God's forty-night appointment, His wrath, or their worship of the calf. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء): Ata interprets the phrase as their hastening God's anger. RAZI-FULL (عطاء): Ata interprets the phrase as asking whether they hastened their Lord’s wrath. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Some interpret the phrase as having hastened your Lord's anger. ELMALILI (author): A further interpretation is that they were rushing toward their Lord’s wrath and punishment. ELMALILI (author): On his return from the meeting, Moses had learned from God that his people had adopted the calf, so he returned in intense anger. TABATABAI (author): Different temperaments and practical judgments between two infallible prophets are possible: infallibility governs divine rulings, not dispositions or ways of life. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): A second explanation is that they hurried toward incurring God's threat and wrath; 20:86 supports this reading. | mentions 20:86 STUDYQURAN (R): The Command may refer to the people hastening God’s judgment through their actions, a Quranic warning to disbelievers. | mentions 6:57, 6:58, 10:50, 10:51 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The clearer reading takes “hastened” as going ahead and “command” as the affair of divine anger and threat: they rushed into the prohibited act soon after warning, as if outrunning punishment; 20:86 is parallel. | mentions 16:1, 11:40, 20:86"}, {"id": "7:150/q11/p3", "position": "They worshipped the calf before receiving God's command.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): أعجلتم means ‘did you outpace’; al-Ḥasan says it refers to God’s promise of forty nights, while al-Kalbī says they hastened to worship the calf before God’s command came. TABRISI (الكلبي): Al-Kalbī says it means they rushed to worship the calf before their Lord's command came to them. NASAFI-FULL (author): أعجلتم means “did you hasten?” by worshipping the calf; أمر ربكم is God's appointment to give the Torah after forty nights, and haste is seeking something before its time. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says they hastened to worship the calf before God's command came to them. RAZI-FULL (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says they hastened by worshipping the calf before God’s command arrived. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Some interpret it as worshipping the calf before a command from God had come to them."}, {"id": "7:150/q11/p4", "position": "They abandoned or changed God's command to remain faithful and await Moses.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والسدي): They explain the hastening as abandoning Moses' promised forty nights because the people thought he had died when he missed the thirtieth night. BURSEVI (author): The interrogative hamza rebukes them: they abandoned the Lord’s command before its proper completion, namely waiting faithfully for Moses and keeping his covenant. ELMALILI (author): One proposed reading of Moses’ question is that the people hurried to abandon their religion and God’s promises. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): One reading of “Have you hastened the command of your Lord?” takes command as God’s obligation to preserve the law and await Moses’ return; the people failed to fulfill it and changed things. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Although Moses had repeatedly warned them against idolatry, the people abandoned monotheism during his short absence, deeply shocking him. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): One explanation is that the people neglected or delayed God's ruling and, by rushing, altered and corrupted his law."}, {"id": "7:150/q11/p5", "position": "They sought the reward of worship prematurely and turned to another object.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (بعض المتأخرين): A later view says they hastened God's promise of reward for worship by turning to worship another instead. TABRISI (أبو علي الجبائي): Abū ʿAlī al-Jubbāʾī says they impatiently sought God's promised reward for worship, then turned to worshipping another when they did not receive it. TABATABAI (author): Another alternative says they expected God's reward for worship, and turned to another object of worship when it did not arrive."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q12", "question": "How does أَعَجِلْتُمْ govern أَمْرَ?", "turns_on": "Whether ʿajila itself takes a direct object or borrows the sense of preempting with ʿan omitted.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q12/p1", "position": "The verb itself can be transitive in the sense of preceding.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): ʿAjila means to precede; aʿjala to urge; they preempted God's command. ZAJJAJ (author): ʿAjila means precede, aʿjala urge. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء، الزجاج): Al-Farra and al-Zajjaj distinguish عجلت الشيء, to precede it, from أعجلته, to urge it. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ʿAjila ʿan al-amr means to leave a matter unfinished; its opposite is to complete it, and it can be made transitive by implication of 'precede'. SAMIN-DURR (يعقوب): Yaʿqūb allows direct transitivity without supplying another verb's sense: عجلت الشيء means I preceded it, while أعجلت الرجل means I made him hurry. BIQAI-FULL (الصغاني): Al-Saghani glosses أعجلتم as سبقتم, meaning you preceded or went ahead. BIQAI-FULL (غيره): Another lexicographer says عجل عن الأمر means leaving an affair unfinished, while also carrying the sense of preceding. ALUSI-FULL (author): Although عجل normally takes عن with أمر to mean leaving something unfinished, the verb here includes the sense of السبق, preemption, and so takes that construction; Yaqub instead treats preemption as its literal meaning. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): ʿAjila is usually intransitive, meaning to hurry; it can mean failing to complete something begun, or be transitive in the sense of going ahead of something."}, {"id": "7:150/q12/p2", "position": "The verb takes a direct object through the implied sense of preempting, sometimes with omitted ʿan.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Were you impatient with your Lord's command?” means leaving it unfinished, with ʿajila carrying the sense of sabaqa, or impatiently changing the promised forty-day return as nations altered things after their prophets. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī parses أمر as an object after dropping عن: عجل عن الأمر means leaving it unfinished, and the verb can take a direct object with the sense of سبق."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q13", "question": "Why did Moses cast the tablets?", "turns_on": "The causal force of his anger, the rival report about Ahmad's community, and whether setting down or involuntary falling is intended.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q13/p1", "position": "He cast them in anger and shock at calf worship.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (author): Prophet: God informed Moses but he cast tablets only after seeing idolatry. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses cast down the tablets that contained the Torah. DAMGHANI (author): Alwāḥ can mean tablets or written pages; Moses cast down the tablets. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Moses cast the tablets down in shock and distress on hearing of the calf, out of anger for God and zeal for His religion. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down; the largest portion, containing an explanation of everything, was lifted, and the remaining portion with guidance and mercy was later taken up. TABRISI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says Moses cast the tablets because he was overcome by anger and distress at his people worshipping the calf. TABRISI (النبي): The Prophet prayed for mercy on Moses: eyewitnessing the people's trial was not like being told of it; although Moses knew God's report was true and held to the tablets, seeing the people made him angry and he cast them. RAZI-FULL (author): Throwing the tablets, which bore the Torah and were Moses’ greatest miracle, signals overwhelming anger because a person would not do this otherwise. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): He cast down the tablets from intense anger and religious zeal. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Moses returned from his communion with God to his people angry and sorrowful; when he confirmed their devotion to the calf, he cast down the tablets. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says Moses dropped the tablets in shock at what had happened to his people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the tablets broke when Moses dropped them; he recovered the greater part containing detailed knowledge, while the remaining piece held guidance and mercy. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس عن النبي): The Prophet says Moses did not throw the tablets when God informed him that his people had fallen into trial; seeing them himself moved him to throw them, for seeing is unlike hearing. DURR-FULL (النبي): The Prophet says seeing is unlike hearing: God told Moses his people had been led astray, but when Moses saw them he cast the tablets and some broke. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports from the Prophet that God had told Moses his people were tested, but Moses did not cast the tablets until he saw them; some then broke. ALUSI-FULL (القاضي ناصر الدين): Al-Qadi explains the throwing as an act of severe anger and religious indignation, and reports that some tablets broke when Moses cast them down. ELMALILI (author): A report says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down: six-sevenths were taken away and one remained, containing guidance and mercy while the removed portion contained detailed explanation of everything. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Throwing the tablets was not punishment of the people, since tablets containing what would reform them could not appropriately be treated as prophetic discipline. IBNASHUR-FULL (التوراة): The Torah says the tablets broke when Moses threw them; the Qur’an does not state this, though the act of throwing and a report that they were stone suggest breakage. | mentions 7:154 TABATABAI (ابن عباس): The Prophet says God have mercy on Moses: after hearing that his people had been tested he did not throw the tablets, but seeing
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
