<<chunk 111, part 2 of 0..5>>
ra rabbikum means you got ahead of it; doing something before its appointed time is blameworthy, while doing it at the first proper time is praiseworthy. QURTUBI-FULL (يعقوب): Yaʿqūb explains ʿajaltu al-shayʾ as getting ahead of it, while aʿjaltu al-rajul means making him hurry. NASAFI-FULL (author): أعجلتم means “did you hasten?” by worshipping the calf; أمر ربكم is God's appointment to give the Torah after forty nights, and haste is seeking something before its time. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya interprets the question as asking whether they tried to outpace God's decree and hastened Moses' arrival before the appointed time. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (يعقوب): Yaʿqub distinguishes ʿajiltu al-shayʾ, being ahead of a thing, from aʿjaltu al-rajul, making a person hurry. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Haste means advancing something before its proper time and is blameworthy, unlike the praised promptness in Moses' words 'I hastened to You, Lord, to please You.' | mentions 20:84 SAMIN-DURR (يعقوب): Yaʿqūb allows direct transitivity without supplying another verb's sense: عجلت الشيء means I preceded it, while أعجلت الرجل means I made him hurry. BIQAI-FULL (الصغاني): Al-Saghani glosses أعجلتم as سبقتم, meaning you preceded or went ahead. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): ʿAjila is usually intransitive, meaning to hurry; it can mean failing to complete something begun, or be transitive in the sense of going ahead of something. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): Al-Farra distinguishes ʿajiltu the matter as getting ahead of it from aʿjaltuhu as urging it on. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Aʿajiltum is a rebuking question. BIQAI-FULL (أبو عبد القزاز): Abu ʿAbd al-Qazzaz also glosses the word as preceding someone; Ibn al-Tayyani attributes this usage to al-Asmaʿi. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi raises Moses’ statement that he hurried to God as an objection to treating haste as blameworthy, then records several readings of amr rabbikum. | mentions 20:84"}, {"id": "7:150/q10/p2", "position": "It can mean leaving a matter unfinished.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والسدي): They explain the hastening as abandoning Moses' promised forty nights because the people thought he had died when he missed the thirtieth night. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ʿAjila ʿan al-amr means to leave a matter unfinished; its opposite is to complete it, and it can be made transitive by implication of 'precede'. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Were you impatient with your Lord's command?” means leaving it unfinished, with ʿajila carrying the sense of sabaqa, or impatiently changing the promised forty-day return as nations altered things after their prophets. NASAFI-FULL (author): Another interpretation takes عجلتم to mean “did you abandon?” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari explains ʿajila ʿan as leaving an affair unfinished; the causative form means making someone hurry away and implies outstripping the appointed time. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī parses أمر as an object after dropping عن: عجل عن الأمر means leaving it unfinished, and the verb can take a direct object with the sense of سبق. BIQAI-FULL (غيره): Another lexicographer says عجل عن الأمر means leaving an affair unfinished, while also carrying the sense of preceding. ALUSI-FULL (author): Although عجل normally takes عن with أمر to mean leaving something unfinished, the verb here includes the sense of السبق, preemption, and so takes that construction; Yaqub instead treats preemption as its literal meaning."}, {"id": "7:150/q10/p3", "position": "Haste precedes the proper time; speed acts promptly within it.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (author): Ajala means doing something before its time, while surʿa means doing it in less time. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Haste is proceeding before the proper time and is blameworthy, whereas speed merely means doing something in less time and is not blameworthy. TABRISI (author): Asaf can mean anger tinged with regret over what passed, grief, or yearning; khalafa means acting after someone either well or badly; haste is doing something before its proper time, whereas speed is doing it at the first possible time. RAZI-FULL (الواحدي): Al-Wahidi distinguishes blameworthy ʿajala, doing something before its proper time, from non-blameworthy surʿa, doing it at the earliest proper time. BURSEVI (author): Here the command can mean the commandments or what was commanded; haste is acting before its time and is blameworthy, unlike speed at the beginning of the proper time."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q11", "question": "What is the Lord's command that they hastened?", "turns_on": "The referent of amr: appointment, wrath, prohibited calf worship, expected reward, or covenant.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q11/p1", "position": "They preempted the promised appointment or Moses' return, including the Torah's descent.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Moses rebuked the people for rushing the forty-day appointment. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والسدي): They explain the hastening as abandoning Moses' promised forty nights because the people thought he had died when he missed the thirtieth night. WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن): Al-Hasan says God's promise was the forty nights; they assumed Moses had died when he did not return after thirty. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses asks if they had hastened ahead of their Lord's appointed forty nights by making the calf; they assumed he had died when he did not return after thirty nights. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): أعجلتم means ‘did you outpace’; al-Ḥasan says it refers to God’s promise of forty nights, while al-Kalbī says they hastened to worship the calf before God’s command came. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Moses asks whether Israel hastened past God's command instead of awaiting him and keeping his charge, supposing the appointment ended and he would not return. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Another report says they counted twenty days and nights as forty, then committed their deed. TABRISI (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says it refers to the promise of forty nights: the people thought Moses had died because he had not returned after thirty nights. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan identifies the appointment as the promised forty nights. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reads amr rabbikum as God’s appointed meeting: why did you not wait for your Lord’s appointment? RAZI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan identifies the matter as the promised forty days: Israel assumed Moses had died when thirty days passed without his return. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Amr rabbikum may mean God's appointment, the promise of forty nights. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Were you impatient with your Lord's command?” means leaving it unfinished, with ʿajila carrying the sense of sabaqa, or impatiently changing the promised forty-day return as nations altered things after their prophets. NASAFI-FULL (author): أعجلتم means “did you hasten?” by worshipping the calf; أمر ربكم is God's appointment to give the Torah after forty nights, and haste is seeking something before its time. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other interpretations take the question to mean that they hastened God's forty-night appointment, His wrath, or their worship of the calf. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Moses asks why they hastened his return; its timing had been decreed by God. ALUSI-FULL (author): A report says al-Samiri told them the calf was their god and Moses would not return because he had died; another says they counted twenty days and nights as forty before making the calf. ALUSI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan understands the phrase as hastening God's promise of forty days, taking أمر to mean a promise or affair rather than a command; al-Tibi says these forty are distinct from the forty nights in 7:142. | mentions 7:142 ELMALILI (author): Another proposed reading is that they impatiently expected the promised forty-night meeting to end, treating Moses as dead after thirty days and hastening to change their religion as other communities did after prophets. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): One reading of “Have you hastened the command of your Lord?” takes command as God’s obligation to preserve the law and await Moses’ return; the people failed to fulfill it and changed things. TABATABAI (author): The preferred reading is that they sought prematurely the Lord's promised affair at Moses' appointment, namely the Torah's descent; God's wise plan is unaffected by human haste or demand. TABATABAI (author): A third alternative says they presumed Moses' appointment had ended and changed their practice rather than waiting for his return as God commanded. TABATABAI (author): The opening says Moses already knew of the people's apostasy before seeing them, because God told him at the appointment, as Ta-Ha recounts. | mentions 20:85 STUDYQURAN (author): The Command may refer to waiting for Moses’ return; the people were impatient and hastened his return. | mentions 7:142 STUDYQURAN (author): Moses’ forty-day stay reportedly lasted ten days beyond what the people expected. | mentions 7:142 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari reads Moses as accusing them of abandoning the wait for God's command and covenant, assuming his appointed time had ended and he had died, then changing religion like earlier nations. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas interprets God's matter as His appointed promise, which the people failed to wait for. TABRISI (ابن عباس): He explains “Did you hasten your Lord's command?” as failing to wait for the appointed promise. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas understands the question as asking why they hastened their Lord's appointed time instead of waiting. ALUSI-FULL (author): أعجلتم أمر ربكم means they rushed ahead of God's command to wait for Moses and preserve his covenant, assuming the appointed time had ended and he would not return. BIQAI-FULL (author): Moses accuses them of assuming he had died and changing the faith as nations changed after their prophets died. STUDYQURAN (author): More broadly, Moses may chastise their impatience about God fulfilling His promise, as he does in the parallel account. | mentions 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
