<<chunk 111, part 4 of 0..5>>
 them himself, he threw them and some broke; seeing is not like hearing. TABATABAI (أبو عبد الله): Al-Ṣādiq reports that merely hearing from God that the people had made a calf did not affect Moses as seeing them did; once he saw them, his anger intensified and he cast the tablets. STUDYQURAN (author): Moses cast down the Tablets in anger and shock, breaking them, as in the Biblical account. | mentions Exodus 32:19 QUSHAYRI (author): Hearing that his people were tested affected Moses less than seeing their condition with his own eyes. WAHIDI-BASIT (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A prophetic report says that what one is told is unlike what one sees: though informed of the trial and holding the tablets, Moses threw them after seeing his people worship the calf. RAZI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says God have mercy on Moses: eyewitnessing the people’s trial was not like merely hearing of it, though Moses knew God’s warning was true and still held what was in his hand. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The material reports illustrate the principle that  direct observation is unlike merely hearing a report. TABATABAI (أبو عبد الله): Al-Ṣādiq adds that direct seeing has an advantage over receiving a report. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers calf-worship anger because Qur'an links throwing with anger. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو الفرج الجوزي argues against): Ibn al-Jawzī asks who can authenticate that Moses threw the tablets as one who intended to break them: scripture only says he cast them down, and neither breakage nor intent is established. ALUSI-FULL (صالح أفندي الموصلي argues against): Al-Mawsili says Haydari misread al-Qadi: religious zeal was not the stated cause of throwing; anger and agitation are the two competing causal complements, and al-Qadi's interpretation permits the verse's wording. ALUSI-FULL (author argues against): Alusi finds al-Mawsili's claim about al-Qadi's intent unclear and rejects treating the verse as a rebuke of Moses, since neither its lead-in nor context supports that reading; the passage censures his people."}, {"id": "7:150/q13/p2", "position": "He set them down to free his hands to seize Aaron.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: anger at calf worship made Moses seize Aaron and throw tablets. SULAMI (author): Qurashi: God excused Moses' zeal in throwing tablets and pulling Aaron because it was without self-interest. JISHUMI (author): The verse narrates Moses returning angry and grieving, rebuking the people, casting down the tablets, and pulling Aaron toward him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The author says Moses merely set the tablets down: his hands had to be free to seize Aaron, and the later statement that he took them again shows they neither broke nor lost portions. | mentions 7:154 ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses set the tablets down in haste to free his hand to seize Aaron, driven by intense religious zeal against the people's idolatry; calling it a throwing heightens blame on the people and signals his fervor without disrespecting scripture. IBNASHUR-FULL (author argues against): T he explanation that Moses threw the tablets to free his hand to seize Aaron is unsound: it gives the throwing no lesson and the narrative would have used a causal “then.”"}, {"id": "7:150/q13/p3", "position": "He cast them after reading the virtues of another community.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Qatada repeats Moses' wish for Ahmad's community and casting of tablets. TAB-FULL (author): Another view: he threw tablets because he saw another people's virtues on them. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: Ahmad's community is best and enjoins right. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: last in creation, first in Paradise. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: scriptures preserved in hearts. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: believes former and later books and fights misguidance. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: charity consumed by recipients yet rewarded. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: good intention earns reward and deed tenfold to seven hundred. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: intended sin is unrecorded until done, then one sin. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: prayers answered and intercession. TAB-FULL (author): Qatada: Moses wanted Ahmad's community, threw tablets, and received distinction and a guided people. MAWARDI-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says Moses saw the virtues of Muhammad's community, asked that they be his community, and threw the tablets in anguish when told they were Ahmad's community. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قتادة): Qatada, if the report is sound, says Moses saw the virtues of Muhammad’s community on the tablets, wanted them for his own community, and grew angry when told they belonged to another. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author argues against): Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls Qatada’s explanation bad and says it should not be attributed to Moses; he holds the first explanation correct. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (قتادة argues against): Qatada says Moses threw them after seeing another community's virtues, but Ibn al-Jawzi considers this explanation remote. QURTUBI-FULL (author argues against): He rejects as a bad, unworthy claim the report attributed to Qatāda that Moses threw the tablets after seeing the merit of Muhammad's community in them, a merit not given to his own community. IBNKATHIR-FULL (قتادة argues against): Ibn Kathir rejects the strange report attributed by al-Tabari to Qatada as an unsound attribution, likely taken from unreliable People of the Book; Ibn Atiyya and others also reject it."}, {"id": "7:150/q13/p4", "position": "He set the tablets down amid zeal and urgency.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The tablets were the Torah; Moses, carrying them, set them down in anger at the calf worship and zeal for God's religion. ALUSI-FULL (author): The tablets' breakage was neither intended nor anticipated; the authorized setting-down arose from haste and zeal for God, comparable to Moses hastening to please his Lord. | mentions 20:84"}, {"id": "7:150/q13/p5", "position": "They fell involuntarily as his self-control failed.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (صبغة الله أفندي الحيدري): Haydari's alternative is that Moses lost self-control and the tablets fell involuntarily; describing this as throwing treats failure to restrain himself as intentional, since the righteous are judged by the standard of the spiritually near."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q14", "question": "What happened to the tablets and their contents after they were cast down?", "turns_on": "Reports of breakage and removed fractions versus objections that the Qur'an states only casting down and later recovery.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q14/p1", "position": "Six sevenths were removed after breakage; one seventh remained.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Report: seven Torah parts; six sevenths lifted after breakage, leaving guidance and mercy. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The Torah had seven parts; six were lifted after the tablets broke, leaving guidance and mercy in the remaining seventh. | mentions 7:145, 7:154 BAGHAWI-FULL (الرواة): The narrators say the Torah consisted of seven portions; the tablets broke, six portions containing unseen reports were lifted, and one remained with admonition, rulings, lawful and forbidden matters. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A report says the Torah had seven parts; after the tablets broke, six sevenths were lifted and one remained, containing all details and mercy. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the shattered tablets lost six sevenths, with one seventh remaining. RAZI-FULL (روي): An unattributed report says the Torah had seven portions; the tablets broke, six portions were lifted, and one remained containing guidance and mercy while the lifted portions held detailed knowledge. BAYDAWI-FULL (رُوي): A report says the Torah comprised seven portions on seven tablets; after they broke, six sevenths were lifted, containing detailed knowledge, while one seventh remained with exhortations and rulings. NASAFI-FULL (author): Moses threw the tablets in anger for God's sake; his naturally intense anger contrasts with Aaron's gentler disposition, which made Aaron more beloved to Israel. They broke: six sevenths were removed and one seventh remained, the removed portion containing detailed knowledge and the remainder guidance and mercy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (جماعة من المفسرين): A group of exegetes say six sevenths of the tablets were taken up and one seventh remained. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): A report says six sevenths of the tablets were lifted and one seventh remained, with a similar report from others. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi says the six-sevenths report conflicts with reports that the Torah came in seventy portions, was read in a year, and was fully read by only Moses, Joshua, Ezra, and Jesus; it also conflicts with the later mention of taking the tablets. | mentions 7:154 ELMALILI (author): A report says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down: six-sevenths were taken away and one remained, containing guidance and mercy while the removed portion contained detailed explanation of everything."}, {"id": "7:150/q14/p2", "position": "The tablets broke, but no precise loss is established.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: hearing idle voices and seeing calf worship, he broke tablets and seized Aaron. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down; the largest portion, containing an explanation of everything, was lifted, and the remaining portion with guidance and mercy was later taken up. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the tablets broke when Moses dropped them; he recovered the greater part containing detailed knowledge, while the remaining piece held guidance and mercy. DURR-FULL (النبي): The Prophet says seeing is unlike hearing: God told Moses his people had been led astray, but when Moses saw them he cast the tablets and some broke. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports from the Prophet that God had told Moses his people were tested, but Moses did not cast the tablets until he saw them; some then broke. ALUSI-FULL (القاضي ناصر الدين): Al
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
