<<chunk 112, part 1 of 0..4>>
on's head and beard, 20:93. TAB-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron for remaining with Israelites rather than following him; he accepted fear of division as excuse, 20:93–94. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The phrase about taking Aaron by the head has two readings: Moses took his ear, or his whole head. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says Moses held Aaron by his forelock and hair with his right hand and his beard with his left. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari explains that Moses reproached Aaron for not reporting the people's grave apostasy, and seized him because he thought Aaron had failed God by staying behind; Aaron explained that the people nearly killed him, after which Moses's suspicion passed and he prayed for both.  | mentions 20:92 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by his forelocks and beard; Aaron was three years older and more beloved to Israel because he was less quick to anger. TABRISI (أبو علي الجبائي): One explanation is that Moses, thinking deeply in anger, treated Aaron like himself and grabbed him as a person may grab his own beard or lip; customs can make the same act honor in one setting and insult in another. TABRISI (author): A fourth explanation is that Moses compassionately pulled Aaron close to calm his similar distress; Aaron feared ignorant people would mistake the gesture for disrespect, so he clarified his innocence and Moses prayed to remove suspicion. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): One reported view says Moses seized Aaron by his beard and forelock. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Other reported views say Moses seized Aaron's head hair or his ear. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by the hair and pulled him toward himself, thinking he had failed to restrain them; Aaron was three years older, gentle, and especially beloved by Israel. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other views say Moses took Aaron by his hair, locks and beard, beard alone, or ear, or only gestured rather than physically seizing him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (هارون): Aaron's appeal that Moses not seize him by beard or head, and his fear of dividing Israel, is quoted from Ta-Ha. | mentions 20:94 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says Moses pulled Aaron close to learn what happened; Aaron feared the Israelites would think Moses was humiliating him and explained their oppression. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view treats the gesture as affection rather than insult, like Arabs seizing a brother's beard. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Moses grabs Aaron because he fears Aaron failed to restrain the people; the parallel account in Ṭā Hā explains Aaron feared Moses would accuse him of dividing Israel or disobeying. | mentions 20:92, 20:93, 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means grasping his hair, the customary way to hold a head; this can coexist with the Ta-Ha account of taking his beard, either by inclusion or by extending the grasp. | mentions 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses thought Aaron had failed to restrain the people and, in overwhelming anger, seized him; Aaron was three years older, while Moses held the higher rank and independent leadership and Aaron served as his minister. TABATABAI (author): A fourth explanation says Moses took Aaron's head compassionately because Aaron shared his grief, while Aaron feared people would mistake the gesture for insult. ALUSI-FULL (author argues against): Alusi rejects the suggestions that Moses grabbed Aaron to whisper and learn the details, or to calm him because he appeared distressed."}, {"id": "7:150/q18/p3", "position": "Moses grasped Aaron's head hair or forelock and beard and pulled him.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses seized Aaron by his forelock and hair, reproaching him for not following him to tell him what Israel had done; the point recalls the exchange in Ṭā Hā. | mentions 20:92 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means by his hair, dragging him by the forelock in the shock that clouded Moses' judgment as he suspected Aaron had failed to restrain the people. NASAFI-FULL (author): He took Aaron by the hair on his head and dragged him in anger because Aaron did not stop the calf worship, rebuking him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says Moses dragged Aaron by the hair and locks in the shock of the event, suspecting Aaron had failed to restrain the people. BIQAI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by the hair and dragged him to show the people how deeply he was angered by their uprooting of religion. BURSEVI (author): Moses threw down the tablets of the Torah and pulled Aaron by the hair toward himself in reproach, not to humiliate him, supposing he had failed to restrain the people; Aaron was older, gentle, and loved by the Israelites. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Moses, deeply shaken, threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head or hair, thinking he had allowed the calf worship; 20:92–93 says Moses blamed him for not coming to report it. | mentions 20:92, 20:93 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head and beard is the apparent meaning of the wording."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q19", "question": "Why did Moses grasp Aaron?", "turns_on": "Whether it was reproach, private inquiry, affection, demonstration, or identification with his brother.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q19/p1", "position": "He rebuked Aaron because he thought Aaron failed to stop the calf worship or report it.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Moses dragged Aaron by the head; Aaron said the people overpowered and nearly killed him and asked not to delight enemies or count him with wrongdoers. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: anger at calf worship made Moses seize Aaron and throw tablets. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: he pulled Aaron by head and threw tablets from anger. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: hearing idle voices and seeing calf worship, he broke tablets and seized Aaron. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Suddī connects 20:86–87 and says he threw tablets and seized Aaron. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Ishaq: seeing calf worship, Moses threw tablets and grabbed Aaron's head and beard, 20:93. TAB-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron for remaining with Israelites rather than following him; he accepted fear of division as excuse, 20:93–94. SULAMI (author): Qurashi: God excused Moses' zeal in throwing tablets and pulling Aaron because it was without self-interest. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The phrase about taking Aaron by the head has two readings: Moses took his ear, or his whole head. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari explains that Moses reproached Aaron for not reporting the people's grave apostasy, and seized him because he thought Aaron had failed God by staying behind; Aaron explained that the people nearly killed him, after which Moses's suspicion passed and he prayed for both.  | mentions 20:92 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses seized Aaron by his forelock and hair, reproaching him for not following him to tell him what Israel had done; the point recalls the exchange in Ṭā Hā. | mentions 20:92 JISHUMI (author): The verse narrates Moses returning angry and grieving, rebuking the people, casting down the tablets, and pulling Aaron toward him. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by his forelocks and beard; Aaron was three years older and more beloved to Israel because he was less quick to anger. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means by his hair, dragging him by the forelock in the shock that clouded Moses' judgment as he suspected Aaron had failed to restrain the people. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): One reported view says Moses seized Aaron by his beard and forelock. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Other reported views say Moses seized Aaron's head hair or his ear. RAZI-FULL (الطاعنون في عصمة الأنبياء): Those who challenge prophetic impeccability say Moses pulled Aaron’s head toward him to humiliate and belittle him. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): The fourth view says Moses embraced Aaron to learn what had happened; Aaron feared Israel would mistake it for humiliation. NASAFI-FULL (author): He took Aaron by the hair on his head and dragged him in anger because Aaron did not stop the calf worship, rebuking him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The author says Moses merely set the tablets down: his hands had to be free to seize Aaron, and the later statement that he took them again shows they neither broke nor lost portions. | mentions 7:154 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent meaning of taking Aaron by the head is that Moses actually grasped and pulled his head toward him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other views say Moses took Aaron by his hair, locks and beard, beard alone, or ear, or only gestured rather than physically seizing him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent explanation is that Moses seized Aaron in anger at his failure to prevent calf worship despite being appointed over the Israelites and commanded to reform them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (هارون): Aaron's appeal that Moses not seize him by beard or head, and his fear of dividing Israel, is quoted from Ta-Ha. | mentions 20:94 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says Moses dragged Aaron by the hair and locks in the shock of the event, suspecting Aaron had failed to restrain the people. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Moses grabs Aaron because he fears Aaron failed to restrain the people; the parallel account in Ṭā Hā explains Aaron feared Moses would accuse him of dividing Israel or disobeying. | mentions 20:92, 20:93, 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses set the tablets down in haste to free his hand to seize Aaron, driven by intense religious zeal against the people's idolatry; calling it a throwing heightens blame on the people and signals his fervor without disrespecting scripture. ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means grasping his hair, the customary way to hold a head; this can coexist with the Ta-Ha account of taking his beard, either by inclusion or by extending the grasp. | mentions 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses thought Aaron had failed to restrain the people and, in overwhelming anger, seized him; Aaron 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
