<<chunk 112, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "7:150/q17", "question": "What did the tablets contain and how were they written?", "turns_on": "Torah contents, reports of divine writing and pen sounds, and what remained after the casting.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q17/p1", "position": "The tablets bore Torah guidance, mercy, and instruction.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Report: seven Torah parts; six sevenths lifted after breakage, leaving guidance and mercy. TAB-FULL (author): Mujahid or Said: emerald tablets; guidance and mercy remained but rulings lost. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The Torah had seven parts; six were lifted after the tablets broke, leaving guidance and mercy in the remaining seventh. | mentions 7:145, 7:154 BAGHAWI-FULL (الرواة): The narrators say the Torah consisted of seven portions; the tablets broke, six portions containing unseen reports were lifted, and one remained with admonition, rulings, lawful and forbidden matters. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A report says the Torah had seven parts; after the tablets broke, six sevenths were lifted and one remained, containing all details and mercy. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down; the largest portion, containing an explanation of everything, was lifted, and the remaining portion with guidance and mercy was later taken up. TABRISI (النبي): The Prophet prayed for mercy on Moses: eyewitnessing the people's trial was not like being told of it; although Moses knew God's report was true and held to the tablets, seeing the people made him angry and he cast them. RAZI-FULL (روي): An unattributed report says the Torah had seven portions; the tablets broke, six portions were lifted, and one remained containing guidance and mercy while the lifted portions held detailed knowledge. BAYDAWI-FULL (رُوي): A report says the Torah comprised seven portions on seven tablets; after they broke, six sevenths were lifted, containing detailed knowledge, while one seventh remained with exhortations and rulings. NASAFI-FULL (author): Moses threw the tablets in anger for God's sake; his naturally intense anger contrasts with Aaron's gentler disposition, which made Aaron more beloved to Israel. They broke: six sevenths were removed and one seventh remained, the removed portion containing detailed knowledge and the remainder guidance and mercy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the tablets broke when Moses dropped them; he recovered the greater part containing detailed knowledge, while the remaining piece held guidance and mercy. ELMALILI (author): A report says the tablets broke when Moses cast them down: six-sevenths were taken away and one remained, containing guidance and mercy while the removed portion contained detailed explanation of everything. ELMALILI (author): He instead understands Moses to have temporarily set aside the tablets, which contained detailed guidance and mercy, so he could first address the crisis in the foundation of religion: monotheism. TABATABAI (ابن عباس): The Prophet says God have mercy on Moses: after hearing that his people had been tested he did not throw the tablets, but seeing them himself, he threw them and some broke; seeing is not like hearing."}, {"id": "7:150/q17/p2", "position": "The tablets contained the Torah.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Torah seventy camel loads, one portion yearly. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses cast down the tablets that contained the Torah. DAMGHANI (author): Alwāḥ can mean tablets or written pages; Moses cast down the tablets. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Moses threw the tablets bearing the Torah to the ground in the intensity of his anger. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas says the tablets were a load of seventy camels and could be read a portion at a time over a year; the author calls this weak and excessive. ITQAN (author): The cited passages show that Moses received the Torah as a complete set, including its tablets; the proof also includes the tablets being written, returned, and held up before Israel. | mentions 7:144, 7:145, 7:154, 7:171 ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi says the six-sevenths report conflicts with reports that the Torah came in seventy portions, was read in a year, and was fully read by only Moses, Joshua, Ezra, and Jesus; it also conflicts with the later mention of taking the tablets. | mentions 7:154 WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies the tablets Moses threw as the tablets containing the Torah. BIQAI-FULL (author): He threw down the Torah tablets in anger for God; this shows his anger was so intense that he could not contain himself, and that it was directed toward God's cause. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Moses threw the tablets from his hand onto the ground; this indicates they were in his hand when he came down from the divine colloquy, as the Torah explicitly says. NASHR (author): The hamza in أم within ابن أم is written as a separate alif in the cited manuscript evidence."}, {"id": "7:150/q17/p3", "position": "God wrote the tablets, and Moses heard the pen; some reports specify gold writing.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Ali: God wrote tablets as Moses heard pens scratch. TAB-FULL (author): Said ibn Jubayr: sapphire tablets, golden writing, God wrote by hand, pens audible. TAB-FULL (author): Said ibn Jubayr: Moses heard pens scratch."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q18", "question": "What physical action does taking Aaron by the head describe?", "turns_on": "Whether the grasp was by head, hair, beard, ear, or only a gesture.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q18/p1", "position": "Moses actually grasped Aaron's head and dragged him toward himself.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: anger at calf worship made Moses seize Aaron and throw tablets. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: he pulled Aaron by head and threw tablets from anger. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Suddī connects 20:86–87 and says he threw tablets and seized Aaron. SULAMI (author): Qurashi: God excused Moses' zeal in throwing tablets and pulling Aaron because it was without self-interest. JISHUMI (author): The verse narrates Moses returning angry and grieving, rebuking the people, casting down the tablets, and pulling Aaron toward him. TABRISI (author): A third explanation is that Moses pulled Aaron close to speak privately and investigate the people through him; Aaron then established his innocence, after which Moses prayed for them both. RAZI-FULL (الطاعنون في عصمة الأنبياء): Those who challenge prophetic impeccability say Moses pulled Aaron’s head toward him to humiliate and belittle him. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The second view says Moses grasped Aaron to whisper about the tablets revealed during their private conversation and hide them from Israel. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The author says Moses merely set the tablets down: his hands had to be free to seize Aaron, and the later statement that he took them again shows they neither broke nor lost portions. | mentions 7:154 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent meaning of taking Aaron by the head is that Moses actually grasped and pulled his head toward him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent explanation is that Moses seized Aaron in anger at his failure to prevent calf worship despite being appointed over the Israelites and commanded to reform them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One view says Moses grabbed Aaron only to tell him privately that the tablets had descended during his communion, and Aaron stopped him lest the Israelites mistake the private exchange for humiliation. ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses set the tablets down in haste to free his hand to seize Aaron, driven by intense religious zeal against the people's idolatry; calling it a throwing heightens blame on the people and signals his fervor without disrespecting scripture. ALUSI-FULL (الشيخ المفيد): The Shi'i al-Mufid says Moses seized Aaron to show the people, in the strongest way, how grave their error was and deter them; Alusi finds this less likely. ELMALILI (author): By seizing Harun first, Moses shows that religious duty takes precedence even over regard for his brother. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): An unnamed report describes Moses as quick-tempered and severe in anger, linking this to striking the Egyptian and dragging Aaron; his reaction signals the enormity of the people’s deed, not discipline. | mentions 28:15, 7:150 TABATABAI (author): Moses threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head, dragging him toward himself; Ta-Ha recounts Moses asking why Aaron did not follow the people when they strayed. | mentions 20:93 TABATABAI (author): Another explanation says Moses pulled Aaron close to consult him privately and ask what had happened. TABATABAI (author): Moses took Aaron's head as if preparing to strike him because he thought Aaron had acted independently; this was discipline over advisory judgment, not punishment for violating a binding command, and Aaron was right. | mentions 7:151 STUDYQURAN (author): Moses seized Aaron in anger because Aaron had failed to preserve the Israelites in righteousness. | mentions 7:142 NAHHAS (author): Taking by head is equivalent to taking his head. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author argues against): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects the report that Moses merely took Aaron aside to speak and prefers the literal angry seizure, citing Aaron’s reminder that Moses left Israel divided and ignored his counsel. | mentions 20:94 IBNASHUR-FULL (author argues against): T he explanation that Moses threw the tablets to free his hand to seize Aaron is unsound: it gives the throwing no lesson and the narrative would have used a causal “then.”"}, {"id": "7:150/q18/p2", "position": "Moses took Aaron by the ear.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Moses dragged Aaron by the head; Aaron said the people overpowered and nearly killed him and asked not to delight enemies or count him with wrongdoers. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Abbas: hearing idle voices and seeing calf worship, he broke tablets and seized Aaron. TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Ishaq: seeing calf worship, Moses threw tablets and grabbed Aar
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
