<<chunk 112, part 2 of 0..4>>
was three years older, while Moses held the higher rank and independent leadership and Aaron served as his minister. ELMALILI (author): By seizing Harun first, Moses shows that religious duty takes precedence even over regard for his brother. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): An unnamed report describes Moses as quick-tempered and severe in anger, linking this to striking the Egyptian and dragging Aaron; his reaction signals the enormity of the people’s deed, not discipline. | mentions 28:15, 7:150 TABATABAI (author): Moses took Aaron's head as if preparing to strike him because he thought Aaron had acted independently; this was discipline over advisory judgment, not punishment for violating a binding command, and Aaron was right. | mentions 7:151 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Moses, deeply shaken, threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head or hair, thinking he had allowed the calf worship; 20:92–93 says Moses blamed him for not coming to report it. | mentions 20:92, 20:93 STUDYQURAN (author): Moses seized Aaron in anger because Aaron had failed to preserve the Israelites in righteousness. | mentions 7:142 ELMALILI (author): Because Moses had appointed Harun as his successor, he begins by holding him responsible. TABATABAI (author): The context indicates Moses was angry at Aaron too, believing he had not resisted the Israelites enough, though Aaron had judged restraint better for communal welfare. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author argues against): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects the report that Moses merely took Aaron aside to speak and prefers the literal angry seizure, citing Aaron’s reminder that Moses left Israel divided and ignored his counsel. | mentions 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author argues against): Alusi rejects the suggestions that Moses grabbed Aaron to whisper and learn the details, or to calm him because he appeared distressed. IBNASHUR-FULL (author argues against): T he explanation that Moses threw the tablets to free his hand to seize Aaron is unsound: it gives the throwing no lesson and the narrative would have used a causal “then.”"}, {"id": "7:150/q19/p2", "position": "He treated Aaron as himself in intense anger.", "reasons": "TABRISI (أبو علي الجبائي): One explanation is that Moses, thinking deeply in anger, treated Aaron like himself and grabbed him as a person may grab his own beard or lip; customs can make the same act honor in one setting and insult in another. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by the hair and pulled him toward himself, thinking he had failed to restrain them; Aaron was three years older, gentle, and especially beloved by Israel. BURSEVI (author): Moses threw down the tablets of the Torah and pulled Aaron by the hair toward himself in reproach, not to humiliate him, supposing he had failed to restrain the people; Aaron was older, gentle, and loved by the Israelites. TABATABAI (author): Moses threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head, dragging him toward himself; Ta-Ha recounts Moses asking why Aaron did not follow the people when they strayed. | mentions 20:93 ALUSI-FULL (أبو علي الجبائي): Al-Jubba'i says Moses treated Aaron as himself, doing to him what a person does in intense anger."}, {"id": "7:150/q19/p3", "position": "He pulled Aaron close to learn privately what happened.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): A third explanation is that Moses pulled Aaron close to speak privately and investigate the people through him; Aaron then established his innocence, after which Moses prayed for them both. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says Moses pulled Aaron close to learn what happened; Aaron feared the Israelites would think Moses was humiliating him and explained their oppression. TABATABAI (author): Another explanation says Moses pulled Aaron close to consult him privately and ask what had happened. NAHHAS (author): One view: Moses took Aaron aside to confer; witnesses might misunderstand. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Another report says Moses took Aaron aside to speak privately; Aaron feared onlookers would assume anger and therefore pleaded with him."}, {"id": "7:150/q19/p4", "position": "He displayed anger to the people to show the apostasy's gravity.", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron by the hair and dragged him to show the people how deeply he was angered by their uprooting of religion. ALUSI-FULL (الشيخ المفيد): The Shi'i al-Mufid says Moses seized Aaron to show the people, in the strongest way, how grave their error was and deter them; Alusi finds this less likely. TABATABAI (author): Another alternative says Moses displayed his anger at the Israelites' apostasy to show its gravity and deter future conduct. ELMALILI (author): The episode depicts something like declaring emergency rule in response to a grave upheaval threatening the foundation of monotheism."}, {"id": "7:150/q19/p5", "position": "He pulled Aaron close affectionately to console him.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): A fourth explanation is that Moses compassionately pulled Aaron close to calm his similar distress; Aaron feared ignorant people would mistake the gesture for disrespect, so he clarified his innocence and Moses prayed to remove suspicion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view treats the gesture as affection rather than insult, like Arabs seizing a brother's beard. TABATABAI (author): A fourth explanation says Moses took Aaron's head compassionately because Aaron shared his grief, while Aaron feared people would mistake the gesture for insult."}, {"id": "7:150/q19/p6", "position": "He drew Aaron close to speak privately about the tablets.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (author): The second view says Moses grasped Aaron to whisper about the tablets revealed during their private conversation and hide them from Israel. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One view says Moses grabbed Aaron only to tell him privately that the tablets had descended during his communion, and Aaron stopped him lest the Israelites mistake the private exchange for humiliation."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q20", "question": "How do sources assess Moses' treatment of Aaron?", "turns_on": "The significance of custom, prophetic impeccability, sincere zeal, and claims of humiliating discipline.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q20/p1", "position": "The seizure could be read as humiliating or disciplining Aaron.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Aaron asks Moses not to let the calf worshippers rejoice over him by striking or humiliating him, or count him among the wrongdoers. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Moses is asked not to do what the enemies hoped for by humiliating or mistreating Aaron; a reading instead addresses the enemies, forbidding them to rejoice. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The people who had weakened Aaron were the calf worshippers, and they had humiliated him. RAZI-FULL (الطاعنون في عصمة الأنبياء): Those who challenge prophetic impeccability say Moses pulled Aaron’s head toward him to humiliate and belittle him. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): The fourth view says Moses embraced Aaron to learn what had happened; Aaron feared Israel would mistake it for humiliation. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): A second interpretation says Moses wanted to whisper about the tablets revealed during the private conversation and conceal them from the Israelites; Aaron objected lest the gesture look humiliating. NASAFI-FULL (author): The enemies are the calf worshippers; Moses should not do what they wish by humiliating or harming Aaron, or treat him as one of the wrongdoers by sharing his anger with them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One view says Moses grabbed Aaron only to tell him privately that the tablets had descended during his communion, and Aaron stopped him lest the Israelites mistake the private exchange for humiliation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says Moses pulled Aaron close to learn what happened; Aaron feared the Israelites would think Moses was humiliating him and explained their oppression. BIQAI-FULL (author): Aaron says the people intimidated him and nearly killed him for objecting; he asks Moses not to let their enemies rejoice at his humiliation or count him among the wrongdoers. BURSEVI (author): Moses threw down the tablets of the Torah and pulled Aaron by the hair toward himself in reproach, not to humiliate him, supposing he had failed to restrain the people; Aaron was older, gentle, and loved by the Israelites. ALUSI-FULL (author): Moses did not intend to humiliate Aaron; the physical reproach addressed what seemed a failure of duty under his leadership, born of religious zeal. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aaron says the people overpowered and humiliated him and disregarded him because he had few supporters. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Throwing the tablets was not punishment of the people, since tablets containing what would reform them could not appropriately be treated as prophetic discipline. STUDYQURAN (author): Aaron asks Moses not to let enemies gloat over his further humiliation at Moses’ hands."}, {"id": "7:150/q20/p2", "position": "The two prophets' different practical judgments are compatible with impeccability.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Their exchange suggests that Moses had a distinct authority even though both brothers were prophets; his deputyship lasted until his return. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Some say Aaron was Moses' full brother; if so, Moses invoked their shared mother to awaken tenderness, stress their bond, and honor their believing mother and her suffering. TABRISI (أبو علي الجبائي): One explanation is that Moses, thinking deeply in anger, treated Aaron like himself and grabbed him as a person may grab his own beard or lip; customs can make the same act honor in one setting and insult in another. RAZI-FULL (المثبتون لعصمة الأنبياء): Those who affirm prophetic impeccability say Moses drew Aaron close in order to speak privately and learn what had happened. QURTUBI-FULL (محمد): The Prophet forbade gloating over one's brother, warning that God might relieve him and test the one who gloats. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس ع
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
