<<chunk 112, part 3 of 0..4>>
ن النبي): The Prophet says Moses did not throw the tablets when God informed him that his people had fallen into trial; seeing them himself moved him to throw them, for seeing is unlike hearing. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other explanations for mentioning their mother are that she raised Moses through dangers, or that Aaron's visible mercy made the maternal reference fitting; the latter draws on his prophetic gift and merciful speech to the people. | mentions 19:53, 20:90 TABATABAI (author): A fourth explanation says Moses took Aaron's head compassionately because Aaron shared his grief, while Aaron feared people would mistake the gesture for insult. TABATABAI (ابن عباس): The Prophet says God have mercy on Moses: after hearing that his people had been tested he did not throw the tablets, but seeing them himself, he threw them and some broke; seeing is not like hearing. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء argues against): A third interpretation is that Moses suspected Aaron sided with the calf-worshippers; Qurtubi says this suspicion is impermissible for prophets."}, {"id": "7:150/q20/p3", "position": "The act did not dishonor Aaron: custom or sincere zeal explains it.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view treats the gesture as affection rather than insult, like Arabs seizing a brother's beard. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One answer is that custom changes whether such an act counts as humiliating, and it may not have been humiliating then. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Another answer compares Moses' action to someone now taking hold of his beard or biting his lip. QUSHAYRI (author): Harun's appeal softened Moses, who returned to God in supplication and confessed his need for forgiveness and mercy. TABATABAI (author): An alternative says Moses handled Aaron as people handle themselves in anger, gripping a beard or biting a lip, because he regarded his brother as himself. QURTUBI-FULL (الترمذي الحكيم): Al-Tirmidhī al-Ḥakīm says Moses was permitted to act because he was God's intimate interlocutor and anyone who reached toward him with harm had committed a grave offense. ASAD-NOTES (author): Against the Biblical account, Asad says the Qur'an does not accuse Aaron of making or worshipping the calf. IBNABIHATIM (author): Ibn Abbas: Moses excused Aaron and sought forgiveness. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو الفرج الجوزي argues against): One cannot compare the states of prophets with those of foolish people. TABATABAI (author argues against): Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī says most or all of these alternative explanations do not fit the passage's context."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q21", "question": "What is the syntax of يَجُرُّهُ إِلَيْهِ?", "turns_on": "The circumstantial clause's attachment and whether a proposed modifier has a linking pronoun.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q21/p1", "position": "Jarr means to pull or drag.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means by his hair, dragging him by the forelock in the shock that clouded Moses' judgment as he suspected Aaron had failed to restrain the people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Jarr means pulling or dragging. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): An unnamed report describes Moses as quick-tempered and severe in anger, linking this to striking the Egyptian and dragging Aaron; his reaction signals the enormity of the people’s deed, not discipline. | mentions 28:15, 7:150 TABATABAI (author): Moses threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head, dragging him toward himself; Ta-Ha recounts Moses asking why Aaron did not follow the people when they strayed. | mentions 20:93"}, {"id": "7:150/q21/p2", "position": "Yajurruhu is a circumstantial clause, primarily of Moses; other attachments are debated.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): يجره إليه can be circumstantial for Moses, the hidden subject of أخذ: he took him while dragging him toward himself. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abū al-Baqāʾ also attaches the circumstantial clause to أخيه; the author calls it weak because a circumstantial clause from a genitive possessor is rare or disallowed, though some permit it when the possessor's part is meant. ALUSI-FULL (author): The two descriptions are either parallel circumstantial clauses or nested, with the second describing the hidden pronoun in the first; Abu al-Baqa also allows the second to replace the first as a full substitute. ALUSI-FULL (author): The clause يجره إليه is circumstantial and may modify Moses' pronoun, the head, or Aaron; Abu al-Baqa considers these attachments weak. SAMIN-DURR (author): The author accepts the genitive-possessor construction in cases where the possessed noun is a part of its possessor. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء argues against): Abū al-Baqāʾ proposes that the clause modifies رأس, but the author objects that this reading lacks a linking pronoun."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q22", "question": "How is ٱبْنَ أُمَّ read?", "turns_on": "The transmitted fatḥa, kasra, and retained-yāʾ forms.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q22/p1", "position": "The mīm has kasra: ibn ummi.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL (author): Ibn Qutayba rejects a reading with open tāʾ, kasra mīm and accusative enemies; derives phrase from ashmata. TAB-FULL (author): Kufans read kasra mīm. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers damma tāʾ, kasra mīm and accusative enemies by consensus; rejects anomaly. ZAJJAJ (author): Ibn umm read with fatḥa or kasra. IBNMUJAHID (author): Ibn Kathir, Nafi, Abu Amr, Hafs open mīm; Ibn Amir, Hamza, Kisai, Abu Bakr kasrate it; same in 20:94. NAHHAS (author): Abu Jafar rejects Humayd's kasra mīm tashmit as morphologically invalid. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Ibn Amir, Abu Bakr, Hamza, Kisai read kasra mīm. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The phrase ابن أم is read with either kasra or fatha on the mīm. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): For the kasra reading, al-Zajjaj treats the expression as a unified noun with a genitive attachment; in the vocative it loses the yāʾ, whose trace remains in the kasra. 3] WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 · الفراء | reports | Al-Farra says frequent vocatives addressed to oneself commonly drop the yāʾ, with يا ابن أم and يا ابن عم as familiar exceptions; less common forms retain it. JISHUMI (العامة): The general reading has taʾḍmit with ḍamma on tāʾ and kasra on mīm, with “the enemies” as its accusative object. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Kufa and Syrian readers break the mīm in ابن أم, omitting the possessive yāʾ while its kasra signals ‘my mother’; Ḥijāz, Basra, and Ḥafṣ open it, meaning ‘son of my mother.’ | mentions 20:94 IBNATIYYA-FULL (حميد بن قيس): Humayd ibn Qays reads with open taʾ, kasra on mīm, and الأعداء nominative; Abu Hatim transmits it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عامر وعاصم في رواية أبي بكر وحمزة والكسائي): They read ابن أم with kasra on mīm, as if the original were ابن أمي; the yaʾ may be deleted for ease or through compounding, the latter being Sibawayh’s more sound account. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): The majority read فلا تشمت with taʾ damma and mīm kasra, and الأعداء in the accusative. TABRISI (ابن عامر وأهل الكوفة عن عاصم): They read ibn um with kasra here and in Ṭā Hā; the other readers put ibn um in the accusative in both places. TABRISI (الزجاج): Readers who use kasra treat ibn um as a single name and then annex it to the speaker's self-reference. RAZI-FULL (ابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي وأبو بكر عن عاصم): Ibn Amir, Hamza, al-Kisa’i, and Abu Bakr from Asim read ibn ummi with kasra on the mīm here and in Ta Ha, deleting the possessive yā because vocatives commonly omit it; the kasra signals possession. | mentions 20:94 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The vocative ibn um is read with the mīm open or kasra; with an open mīm, the words become one compound name like khamsata ʿashar. QURTUBI-FULL (author): With a kasra, ibn um is possessive to the first-person pronoun; the yāʾ is omitted in vocative speech and its trace remains as the mīm's kasra. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd reports Ḥumayd's reading tushmit with kasra on the mīm. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش وأبو حاتم): They read the mīm with kasra but call this dialect rare and the reading remote; they object that a noun built into another construct normally keeps its possessive suffix. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · ابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي وأبو بكر عن عاصم | repor ts | These readers pronounce “son of my mother” with kasra here and in Ṭā Hā, eliding the yāʾ and relying on kasra for ease. NASAFI-FULL (author): ابن أم is a compound; Hamza, Ali, and the Shami reader pronounce the م with kasra because the original ي was deleted and its kasra retained. Although Aaron shared both parents, the mother is named because she believed and her mention invites compassion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (باقي السبعة): The remaining canonical readers use a kasra on mīm; the Kufan analysis treats the form as inflected with the possessive yāʾ omitted and represented by kasra. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid also has tashmat with both vowels open and al-aʿdāʾ nominative, while Humayd ibn Qays has a kasra on mīm; they make the verb intransitive with enemies as its subject. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن محيصن): Ibn Muhaysin reads tashmat with fatḥa on tāʾ, kasra on mīm, and the enemies in the accusative. SAMIN-DURR (الأخوان وأبو بكر وابن عامر): Al-Akhawān, Abū Bakr, and Ibn ʿĀmir read ابن أم with a kasra here and in Ṭā Hā; the others read it with a fatḥa. | mentions 20:94 SAMIN-DURR (author): Another reading has ابن إم with kasra on both hamza and mīm by phonetic assimilation. NASHR (ابن عامر، حمزة، الكسائي، خلف، أبو بكر): These readers pronounce the mīm of Ibn umm with kasra in al-Araf and Ta Ha. | mentions 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (ابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي وأبو بكر عن عاصم): Ibn Amir, Hamza, al-Kisa'i, and Abu Bakr from Asim read ابن أم with a genitive ending, from ابن أمي with the ya deleted and its kasra retained for ease; the other readers use fatḥ for further ease or by analogy with a compound numeral. QIRAAT-ER (author): A second segment likewise identifies ummi with kasra as the standard genitive in iḍāfa. AKHFASH (author): Some read final kasra as a dialect compound like khāzbāz. IBNATIYYA-FULL 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
