<<chunk 113, part 3 of 0..5>>
nd nearly killed him. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses learned Aaron was innocent of blame because Aaron had protested so strongly that he feared being killed. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): ‘The people weakened me’ means the calf worshippers overpowered Aaron and nearly killed him; he asks Moses not to let the enemies rejoice or count him among the wrongdoers, meaning calf worshippers. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Aaron says he did all he could through warning and admonition, but the people overpowered and weakened him and nearly killed him. TABRISI (author): Aaron says the people treated him as weak and nearly killed him because of his forceful objection. RAZI-FULL (author): Aaron explains that the people disregarded him and nearly killed him; asking Moses not to gladden enemies means not to leave him sharing the calf worshippers’ punishment. RAZI-FULL (author): Aaron feared ignorant Israelites would think Moses was angry with him as with the calf worshippers; they had ignored Aaron’s warning and nearly killed him. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): Aaron explained that the calf-worshippers had oppressed him and nearly killed him. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Aaron's fear that the people would kill him shows that a person who fears being killed while forbidding wrong may remain silent. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Aaron explains that the people overpowered and weakened him, and nearly killed him, dispelling the idea that he had neglected his duty; he tried all he could to stop them. NASAFI-FULL (author): Aaron says he tried his utmost through admonition and warning, but the people overpowered him and nearly killed him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Aaron's explanation shows he had not failed to admonish and warn; the people overpowered him and ignored his counsel, nearly killing him. BIQAI-FULL (author): Aaron says the people intimidated him and nearly killed him for objecting; he asks Moses not to let their enemies rejoice at his humiliation or count him among the wrongdoers. BURSEVI (author): Aaron says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him to dispel Moses’s suspicion that he had been negligent: he had tried his utmost to stop them. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aaron says they nearly killed him when he forbade their conduct, and means that he had exerted every effort to stop them. ELMALILI (author): Harun says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him, then asks Moses not to give their enemies cause to gloat or count him among the unjust; he disowns their actions and says he did not deserve blame for failing to stop them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Aaron’s “they nearly killed me” shows that he resisted them forcefully and then yielded for fear of being killed. TABATABAI (هارون): Aaron says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him because he opposed their calf worship; he asks Moses not to let enemies gloat or count him among wrongdoers. STUDYQURAN (author): Aaron says the people were prepared to kill him; elsewhere he explains that stronger action might have made him blamed for causing discord. | mentions 20:94 TAB-FULL (author): They nearly but did not kill him. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): كادوا means they nearly did it, but did not actually do it."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q28", "question": "Why does يَقْتُلُونَنِي have two nūns?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q28/p1", "position": "The verb keeps its indicative nūn and the pronoun's nūn; assimilation is possible outside recitation.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): Yaqtulūnanī retains two nūns, the indicative verb and pronoun; plural nūn has fatḥa and dual kasra. NAHHAS (author): Two nūns remain in imperfect verbs; assimilation outside recitation. TABRISI (author): Grammatically, ghaḍbāna is a circumstantial accusative and an intensive faʿlān form, with feminine ghaḍbā; it is diptote because its final alif-nūn resembles the feminine dual ending. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The recited yaqtulūnanī has two nūns because it is a future verb, though assimilation is possible outside Qur'anic recitation. AKHFASH (author): Assimilation or concealment of nūn also occurs in 46:17."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q29", "question": "What is shamāta or gloating?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q29/p1", "position": "Shamāta is an enemy's joy at another's misfortune.", "reasons": "IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Nominative enemies are subjects and plea means they not gloat. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد فيما حكاه أبو حاتم): Mujahid’s first transmitted reading opens taʾ and mīm and puts الأعداء in the nominative, meaning “do not let them gloat because of something you do to me.” IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Schadenfreude is an enemy’s joy at the misfortune of an enemy. TABRISI (author): ʿAjaltuhu means I preceded him, while aʿjaltuhu means I urged him on; shamātah is an enemy's joy at another's bad outcome. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Shamāta is rejoicing at a brother's religious or worldly misfortune; Moses asks that enemies not rejoice, and such gloating is forbidden. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Do not make the enemies gloat over me” means do not do something that would make them rejoice at him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): On the intransitive readings, the surface wording tells the enemies not to gloat, while the intended plea to Aaron is not to expose Moses to harm that would make them rejoice. SAMIN-DURR (حميد بن قيس ومجاهد): Ḥumayd ibn Qays and Mujāhid read the verb intransitively with الأعداء nominative as its subject; the prohibition formally addresses Moses while meaning he should not cause their gloating. SAMIN-DURR (author): Al-ishmāt and شماتة mean delight in a misfortune that befalls one's enemy; a poem says death is preferable to enemies' gloating. SAMIN-DURR (author): An etymology relates شماتة to an animal's legs, because a gloating heart shifts between joy and grief as an animal's legs shift. BURSEVI (author): Aaron asks Moses not to do anything that gives enemies cause to rejoice over him; the word denotes delight at an enemy’s misfortune, and such gloating is worse than any hardship. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aaron asks Moses not to give the enemies cause to rejoice over him; schadenfreude is an enemy's pleasure at another's misfortune, and they do not understand Moses' motive. ELMALILI (author): The cited poetic line says death is lighter than the enemies’ gloating, using shamatat for their malicious rejoicing. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Shamāta is delight at another’s injury, arising from enmity or envy; it is intransitive, has an irregular verbal noun, takes bi for its object, and causative ashmata means to make someone gloat. NAHHAS (author): Prohibition prevents enemies gloating; Arab lā arīnnaka analogy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Ishmāt means taking pleasure in the misfortune that befalls someone. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الشاعر): A poet says death is preferable to the enemies' gloating."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q30", "question": "How is فَلَا تُشْمِتْ بِىَ ٱلْأَعْدَاءَ read?", "turns_on": "The verb's initial and middle vowels and whether the enemies are accusative or nominative.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q30/p1", "position": "The common causative form has ḍamma tāʾ, kasra mīm, and accusative enemies.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): Mujāhid read falā tashmat; Kisāʾī queries whether enemies should be nominative; Arabic permits vocalic parallels. FARRA (author): In either tashmit or tashmat, enemies are nominative as subjects. TAB-FULL (author): Regional readers use causative tushmit, enemies accusative. IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Mujahid read both tashmat and yashmat. THALABI (author): Common tushmit: tāʾ damma, mīm kasra, enemies accusative. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): The majority read فلا تشمت with taʾ damma and mīm kasra, and الأعداء in the accusative. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد ومالك بن دينار): They read tushmit with the tāʾ in the subjunctive and al-aʿdāʾ nominative: do not do something to me that gives enemies cause to gloat. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd reports Ḥumayd's reading tushmit with kasra on the mīm. SAMIN-DURR (author): The standard reading has damma on ت and kasra on م in تشمت, from the quadriliteral أشمت, with الأعداء as its object. SAMIN-DURR (ابن محيصن ومجاهد): Ibn Muḥayṣin reads تشمت with fatḥa on ت and kasra on م; Mujāhid has fatḥa on both, and both take الأعداء as object. SAMIN-DURR (ابن جني): Ibn Jinnī suggests that تشمت is addressed to God, with an implied object for الأعداء; the author rejects this as needless, since the triliteral verb is already transitive. QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس argues against): Al-Naḥḥās says the kasra reading has no valid basis: the sh-m-t form would require tashmat, while the causative form would require tushemit."}, {"id": "7:150/q30/p2", "position": "The triliteral verb has open tāʾ with accusative enemies.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): He also reads tushmit with open vowels and al-aʿdāʾ accusative; Ibn Jinnī explains this as Moses asking God not to make the enemies gloat over him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن محيصن): Ibn Muhaysin reads tashmat with fatḥa on tāʾ, kasra on mīm, and the enemies in the accusative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid reads tashmat with both tāʾ and mīm open and the enemies in the accusative. IBNATIYYA-FULL (المهدوي عن ابن محيصن): Al-Mahdawi introduces a reading from Ibn Muhaysin that is given in the next segment."}, {"id": "7:150/q30/p3", "position": "The triliteral verb has open tāʾ and mīm with nominative enemies.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid also has tashmat with both vowels open and al-aʿdāʾ nominative, while Humayd ibn Qays has a kasra on mīm; they make the verb intransitive with enemies as its subject. TAB-FULL (author): Mujahid's alternate tashmat is legitimate Arabic with parallels. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Abu al-Jawza and Ibn Abi Abla use that same verb reading but put al-aʿdaʾ in the nominative."}, {"id": "7:150/q30/p4", "position": "A variant has yāʾ in the verb.", "reasons": "TABRISI (مجاهد): In a noncanonical reading, Mujāhid has tašmit with fatḥa on tāʾ and mīm and al-aʿdāʾ in the accusative; he also reports yashmit with yāʾ
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
