<<chunk 113, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "7:150/q23", "question": "What grammatical analysis explains ٱبْنَ أُمَّ?", "turns_on": "Compound formation versus ordinary annexation and whether a possessive yāʾ or vocative alif was elided.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q23/p1", "position": "Frequent ibn umm forms a compound vocative like khamsata ʿashara.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): Ibn umm is one compound name, though this is not a productive formation. TAB-FULL (author): Yāʾ remains because mother is not directly vocative, the son is. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Sibawayh: frequent ibn umm and ibn ʿamm compound into one name. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكوفيون، الفراء): Kufans analyze the fatha like a singular vocative in forms such as يا حسرتا, effectively addressing the mother as يا أماه. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Another grammatical explanation treats ابن أم as one compound noun built on fatḥa, like Ḥaḍramawt and fifteen; Moses used the phrase to soften Aaron and elicit sympathy, though another view says they shared only a mother. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن كثير ونافع وأبو عمرو وحفص عن عاصم): They read ابن أم with fatḥa on the mīm; Kufan grammarians derive it from ابن أماه with deletion for ease, while Sibawayh treats the two words as a compound like خمسة عشر. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Without treating ابن أم as a compound, deleting the possessive yaʾ would not be valid because “mother” is not being called directly. TABRISI (author): The accusative vocalization in ibn um reflects the frequent use of the phrase as a single compound name, as in “son of my mother” or “son of my uncle”; some Arabs retain the yāʾ in ibn ummī. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sībawayh cites the compound vocatives yā ibn umm and yā ibn ʿamm, more common than yā ibn abī or yā ghulāma ghulāmī. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): An unnamed poet retains the ya in the vocative phrase ibn ummi, addressing Moses as a brother and successor in hardship. RAZI-FULL (الباقون): The remaining readers use fatḥ on the mīm in both suras; one explanation treats ibn umm as a single compound name, like Hadramawt or fifteen. | mentions 20:94 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The vocative ibn um is read with the mīm open or kasra; with an open mīm, the words become one compound name like khamsata ʿashar. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (سيبويه): Sibawayh analyzes ibn umma with an open mīm as two nouns compounded and built on fatḥa, rather than a genitive possessive. SAMIN-DURR (البصريون): On the Basran account of the fatḥa reading, ابن أم is a compound like خمسة عشر, built on fatḥa rather than an iḍāfa construction. BURSEVI (author): “Son of my mother” omits the vocative particle and its substitute alif for ease; although full brothers, Aaron names their mother to soften Moses and invite compassion, as Arabic custom does. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aaron's ابن أم omits the vocative particle because the moment is urgent; calling him son of their mother softens the appeal, though they were full brothers according to the strongest view. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي وأبو بكر عن عاصم): Ibn Amir, Hamza, al-Kisa'i, and Abu Bakr from Asim read ابن أم with a genitive ending, from ابن أمي with the ya deleted and its kasra retained for ease; the other readers use fatḥ for further ease or by analogy with a compound numeral. QIRAAT-ER (author): The kasra in ummi is the regular genitive of iḍāfa rather than vocative fatḥa, giving son of my mother. AKHFASH (author): A poet uses yā ibn ummī. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers regular yā ibn ummī with yāʾ, citing Abu Zubayd. TAB-FULL (author): Abu Zubayd poetically says yā ibn ummī. TAB-FULL (author): Another poet retains yāʾ. ZAJJAJ (author): Fatḥa from frequent compound like fifteen. ZAJJAJ (author): Some retain yāʾ in yā ibn ummī. ZAJJAJ (author): Poetry attests yā ibn ummī. NAHHAS (author): Akhfash and Abu Hatim compare odd doubled vocative. NAHHAS (author): Abu Jafar rejects odd analogy and prefers compound vocative. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Abu Zubayd's poem retains yāʾ. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Ibn fatḥa is built ending, not accusative; compare lā rajula. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The yāʾ remains in less common expressions such as يا ابن أبي, and the source cites Abu Zubayd's verse with يا ابن أمي as the original form. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The author prefers the Basran account: the fatha on ابن is like that in خمسة and that on أم like that in عشر. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج والنحاس): They offer a sound analysis: ibn with um or ʿamm forms one compound like khamsata ʿashar, and the possessive yāʾ is omitted as in yā ghulām. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The vocative and the following sentence together complete what was said, to soften Moses' anger and excuse Aaron as having warned them as far as his strength allowed. SAMIN-DURR (author): A poetic example such as كن لي لا علي يا بن عما shows yāʾ changing to alif. BURHAN (author): The vocative يا can be omitted, as in the address to Moses' brother, as well as in other cited addresses. QIRAAT-ER (author): The canonical variant opens the possessive yāʾ with fatḥa, a pronunciation change without semantic effect. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The concise account in al-Aʿrāf omits the vocative particle where meaning stays clear, while Ṭāhā’s fuller narration includes it as part of its detailed wording. | mentions 20:94 NAHHAS (author): Basrans reject deleted light alif and prefer compound like fifteen. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش وأبو حاتم): They allow ibn um and ibn ʿamm because those phrases are frequent in speech. WAHIDI-BASIT (سيبويه): Sibawayh compares retaining the original form here to the established form al-quswa, whose rejected original was used. QURTUBI-FULL (البصريون argues against): The Basran grammarians reject that analysis: the light alif is not elided, so the two nouns must instead be compounded."}, {"id": "7:150/q23/p2", "position": "The kasra reflects annexation to the speaker with a dropped possessive yāʾ.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari: open is lamenting son of my mother, kasra annexation with omitted yāʾ. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Compound retains underlying iḍāfa; Abu Zubayd's yā ibn ummī shows original. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): For the kasra reading, al-Zajjaj treats the expression as a unified noun with a genitive attachment; in the vocative it loses the yāʾ, whose trace remains in the kasra. 3] WAHIDI-BASIT, d. 468 · الفراء | reports | Al-Farra says frequent vocatives addressed to oneself commonly drop the yāʾ, with يا ابن أم and يا ابن عم as familiar exceptions; less common forms retain it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عامر وعاصم في رواية أبي بكر وحمزة والكسائي): They read ابن أم with kasra on mīm, as if the original were ابن أمي; the yaʾ may be deleted for ease or through compounding, the latter being Sibawayh’s more sound account. TABRISI (الزجاج): Readers who use kasra treat ibn um as a single name and then annex it to the speaker's self-reference. RAZI-FULL (ابن عامر وحمزة والكسائي وأبو بكر عن عاصم): Ibn Amir, Hamza, al-Kisa’i, and Abu Bakr from Asim read ibn ummi with kasra on the mīm here and in Ta Ha, deleting the possessive yā because vocatives commonly omit it; the kasra signals possession. | mentions 20:94 QURTUBI-FULL (author): With a kasra, ibn um is possessive to the first-person pronoun; the yāʾ is omitted in vocative speech and its trace remains as the mīm's kasra. NASAFI-FULL (author): ابن أم is a compound; Hamza, Ali, and the Shami reader pronounce the م with kasra because the original ي was deleted and its kasra retained. Although Aaron shared both parents, the mother is named because she believed and her mention invites compassion. BIQAI-FULL (author): In ابن أم, the vocative particle and possessive yā are omitted for brevity suited to the moment. QIRAAT-ER (author): A second segment likewise identifies ummi with kasra as the standard genitive in iḍāfa. TAB-FULL (author): Basrans: open is compound, kasra another fused-name dialect. TAB-FULL (author): Kufans: open is vocative accusative; kasra drops first-person yāʾ. TAB-FULL (author): Some compare kasra to khāzbāz; Yunus says feminine umm and ʿamm form one name only with masculine ibn. ZAJJAJ (author): Kasra from annexing unified noun to speaker. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Basran and Kufan grammarians agree on the kasra analysis described above. TABRISI (أبو علي): In the compound vocative, ibn's fatḥa is a built ending resembling its case vowel, not the accusative of an annexed vocative; he compares lā rajula and the command-form makānaka. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the open form reflects frequent use of this name, while the kasra makes an annexation after treating the words as one name. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The phrase ya ʿibādī at 39:10 is cited to support retaining a kasra as a sign of the omitted possessive yāʾ. | mentions 39:10 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (سيبويه): For the kasra form, Sibawayh says it is built and attached to the possessive yāʾ, omitted with its kasra retained; an ordinary construct-state form could not drop the yāʾ because it is not itself vocative. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ says frequent vocatives addressed to oneself commonly drop the yāʾ, with yā ibn umm and yā ibn ʿamm as familiar exceptions; less common forms retain it."}, {"id": "7:150/q23/p3", "position": "The open mīm comes from an underlying vocative alif, later elided.", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA (author): Reject deriving open mīm from deleted alif; vocative yāʾ stays in construct and poetic bint ʿammā retains alif. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Verse-final yāʾ deletion in 18:64 and 89:4 does not justify deleted alif here. TABRISI (author): Alif deletion occurs in some poetic forms, such as ibn al-maʿallā for al-maʿallā and bilahtafī for bilahtafā, but not in ordinary speech; on that rare analysis ibn would be accusative while umm's ending resembles the mīm in bint ʿammā. SAMIN-DURR (الكوفيون): The Kufans treat ابن as annexed to أم, itself annexed to the first-person yāʾ; yāʾ becomes alif and is deleted, with fatḥa substituting for it, so ابن is inflected and أم is genitive. RAZI-FULL (الباقون): The other explanation drops the alif that
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
