<<chunk 113, part 4 of 0..5>>
."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q31", "question": "How are the verb and ٱلْأَعْدَاءَ construed?", "turns_on": "Causative or triliteral transitivity, intransitive subject, and the proposed ellipsis.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q31/p1", "position": "The enemies are accusative objects of causative or transitive 'make gloat'.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL (author): Ibn Qutayba rejects a reading with open tāʾ, kasra mīm and accusative enemies; derives phrase from ashmata. TAB-FULL (author): Regional readers use causative tushmit, enemies accusative. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers damma tāʾ, kasra mīm and accusative enemies by consensus; rejects anomaly. THALABI (author): Common tushmit: tāʾ damma, mīm kasra, enemies accusative. JISHUMI (العامة): The general reading has taʾḍmit with ḍamma on tāʾ and kasra on mīm, with “the enemies” as its accusative object. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): The majority read فلا تشمت with taʾ damma and mīm kasra, and الأعداء in the accusative. TABRISI (مجاهد): In a noncanonical reading, Mujāhid has tašmit with fatḥa on tāʾ and mīm and al-aʿdāʾ in the accusative; he also reports yashmit with yāʾ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): On the intransitive readings, the surface wording tells the enemies not to gloat, while the intended plea to Aaron is not to expose Moses to harm that would make them rejoice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن محيصن): Ibn Muhaysin reads tashmat with fatḥa on tāʾ, kasra on mīm, and the enemies in the accusative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid reads tashmat with both tāʾ and mīm open and the enemies in the accusative. SAMIN-DURR (author): The standard reading has damma on ت and kasra on م in تشمت, from the quadriliteral أشمت, with الأعداء as its object. SAMIN-DURR (ابن محيصن ومجاهد): Ibn Muḥayṣin reads تشمت with fatḥa on ت and kasra on م; Mujāhid has fatḥa on both, and both take الأعداء as object. BIQAI-FULL (author): Aaron says the people intimidated him and nearly killed him for objecting; he asks Moses not to let their enemies rejoice at his humiliation or count him among the wrongdoers. ALUSI-FULL (author): A variant reading makes the verb intransitive, so the enemies themselves rejoice over Aaron; the phrase still conveys the same meaning, and the explicit noun replaces their pronoun rhetorically. TAB-FULL (author): Ordinary Arabic uses shamita bihi rather than rejected construction. SAMIN-DURR (author): The clearest analysis makes the triliteral تشمت itself transitive like أشمت; this needs no implied subject or object. SAMIN-DURR (author): The analogy with God mocking or scheming is valid only as a rhetorical counter to the opponents' mockery or scheming; such countering is absent here. | mentions 2:14, 3:54 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author argues against): The author rejects Abu al-Fath's strained intransitive reading: shamit is reported as transitive, so no omitted verb is needed; the comparisons with God's mockery or plotting are replies to opponents, not initiated speech."}, {"id": "7:150/q31/p2", "position": "The enemies are nominative subjects of an intransitive verb.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): Mujāhid read falā tashmat; Kisāʾī queries whether enemies should be nominative; Arabic permits vocalic parallels. FARRA (author): In either tashmit or tashmat, enemies are nominative as subjects. IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Nominative enemies are subjects and plea means they not gloat. THALABI (author): Malik reads open tāʾ and mīm, enemies nominative. JISHUMI (مجاهد ومالك بن دينار): Mujahid and Malik ibn Dinar read with fatḥa on tāʾ and mīm, making “the enemies” the subject who gloat. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد فيما حكاه أبو حاتم): Mujahid’s first transmitted reading opens taʾ and mīm and puts الأعداء in the nominative, meaning “do not let them gloat because of something you do to me.” IBNATIYYA-FULL (حميد بن قيس): Humayd ibn Qays reads with open taʾ, kasra on mīm, and الأعداء nominative; Abu Hatim transmits it. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد ومالك بن دينار): They read tushmit with the tāʾ in the subjunctive and al-aʿdāʾ nominative: do not do something to me that gives enemies cause to gloat. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid also has tashmat with both vowels open and al-aʿdāʾ nominative, while Humayd ibn Qays has a kasra on mīm; they make the verb intransitive with enemies as its subject. SAMIN-DURR (حميد بن قيس ومجاهد): Ḥumayd ibn Qays and Mujāhid read the verb intransitively with الأعداء nominative as its subject; the prohibition formally addresses Moses while meaning he should not cause their gloating. NAHHAS (author): Mujahid and Malik use feminine collective agreement in tushmit; masculine possible."}, {"id": "7:150/q31/p3", "position": "An accusative alternative addresses God and supplies an omitted verb for enemies.", "reasons": "IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Accusative enemies can address God figuratively not to gloat. IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Ellipsis then supplies a verb governing enemies. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد فيما حكاه أبو الفتح): Another Mujahid reading opens taʾ and mīm but leaves الأعداء accusative; Abu al-Fath parses it as addressing God, then ellipsing a verb for the enemies. | mentions 2:15 QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): He also reads tushmit with open vowels and al-aʿdāʾ accusative; Ibn Jinnī explains this as Moses asking God not to make the enemies gloat over him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو الفتح): Abu al-Fath construes Mujahid's reading intransitively as a prayer that God not gloat, supplying an omitted verb for 'the enemies'; the author calls this strained because shamit is attested as transitive. SAMIN-DURR (ابن جني): Ibn Jinnī suggests that تشمت is addressed to God, with an implied object for الأعداء; the author rejects this as needless, since the triliteral verb is already transitive. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abū al-Baqāʾ reads the implied subject in the alternative parse as Moses himself, which the author says is preferable to making God the subject. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author argues against): Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls Abu al-Fath’s grammatical explanation strained."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q32", "question": "What is Aaron asking Moses not to do in فَلَا تُشْمِتْ?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q32/p1", "position": "Moses should not humiliate or harm Aaron in a way that makes enemies rejoice.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Moses dragged Aaron by the head; Aaron said the people overpowered and nearly killed him and asked not to delight enemies or count him with wrongdoers. IBNJINNI-MUHTASAB (author): Nominative enemies are subjects and plea means they not gloat. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The enemies are those who opposed Aaron over the calf worship; their opposition made them his enemies. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi glosses استضعفوني as they humiliated and overpowered me. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The enemies Aaron asks not to be made a source of rejoicing for are the calf worshippers. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Aaron asks Moses not to let the calf worshippers rejoice over him by striking or humiliating him, or count him among the wrongdoers. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): ‘The people weakened me’ means the calf worshippers overpowered Aaron and nearly killed him; he asks Moses not to let the enemies rejoice or count him among the wrongdoers, meaning calf worshippers. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Moses is asked not to do what the enemies hoped for by humiliating or mistreating Aaron; a reading instead addresses the enemies, forbidding them to rejoice. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد فيما حكاه أبو حاتم): Mujahid’s first transmitted reading opens taʾ and mīm and puts الأعداء in the nominative, meaning “do not let them gloat because of something you do to me.” IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد فيما حكاه أبو الفتح): Another Mujahid reading opens taʾ and mīm but leaves الأعداء accusative; Abu al-Fath parses it as addressing God, then ellipsing a verb for the enemies. | mentions 2:15 IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو الفتح): He explains the open-taʾ reading as “You, Lord, do not gloat over me,” then returns to the intended sense by supplying an omitted verb governing الأعداء. | mentions 2:15 TABRISI (author): Aaron asks Moses not to make the enemies rejoice through an act whose outward appearance suggests disrespect, and not to group him with calf worshippers as one of the wrongdoers. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The people who had weakened Aaron were the calf worshippers, and they had humiliated him. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The enemies Aaron asks not to be gladdened are the calf worshippers. RAZI-FULL (author): Aaron explains that the people disregarded him and nearly killed him; asking Moses not to gladden enemies means not to leave him sharing the calf worshippers’ punishment. RAZI-FULL (الطاعنون في عصمة الأنبياء): Those who challenge prophetic impeccability say Moses pulled Aaron’s head toward him to humiliate and belittle him. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): The fourth view says Moses embraced Aaron to learn what had happened; Aaron feared Israel would mistake it for humiliation. QURTUBI-FULL (العلماء): A second interpretation says Moses wanted to whisper about the tablets revealed during the private conversation and conceal them from the Israelites; Aaron objected lest the gesture look humiliating. QURTUBI-FULL (محمد): The Prophet forbade gloating over one's brother, warning that God might relieve him and test the one who gloats. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A poem illustrates that people who gloat over another's hardship may later suffer the same fate. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد ومالك بن دينار): They read tushmit with the tāʾ in the subjunctive and al-aʿdāʾ nominative: do not do something to me that gives enemies cause to gloat. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): He also reads tushmit with open vowels and al-aʿdāʾ accusative; Ibn Jinnī explains this as Moses asking God not to make the enemies gloat over him. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Shamāta is rejoicing at a brother's religious or worldly misfortune; Moses asks that enemies not rejoice, and such gloating is forbidden. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Do not make the enemies gloat over me” means do not do something that would make them rejoice at him. NASAF
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
