<<chunk 114, part 5 of 0..5>>
ULL (author argues against): Al-Ālūsī says this rebuttal attacks a claim no Muslim made: that tribes could arbitrarily rewrite revelation in their dialects; the readings instead reflect revealed forms transmitted beyond a Companion’s own dialect. ALUSI-FULL (ابن قتيبة argues against): Ibn Qutayba rejects the dialect theory because the Quran was revealed only in Quraysh’s language, citing the rule that each messenger speaks his people’s language. | mentions 14:4"}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p14", "position": "Sībawayh analyzes lā with an indefinite noun as a joined subject phrase.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Lā makes noun accusative like inna but drops tanwin because joined like fifteen. SIBAWAYH (author): Lā only governs indefinites and its noun occupies subject position. SIBAWAYH (author): Lā parallels rubba and kam in governing indefinites. SIBAWAYH (author): Rubba is quantitative like kam; unusual forms compare with yā Allāh. SIBAWAYH (author): Lā plus noun is subject with implied or expressed place/time predicate. SIBAWAYH (author): Predicate means no person or thing exists at a time or place. SIBAWAYH (author): Ḥijāzī lā rajula afḍala minka supports subject analysis. SIBAWAYH (author): Yunus reports mā min rajulin and hal min rajulin examples. SIBAWAYH (author): Lā cannot be separated from noun, like min from governed noun."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p15", "position": "Al-Bāqillānī supplies literary and sermonic comparisons in his account of eloquence.", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): Tadhyīl illustrated with Abu Dawud, Huti'a, Jarir, and unnamed poets. BAQILLANI (author): Istitrād illustrated by Hassan ibn Thabit, al-Samaw'al, and other poets. BAQILLANI (author): Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz warns of death, resurrection, and judgment. BAQILLANI (author): Umar says allotted provision reaches a person anywhere and should be pursued calmly. BAQILLANI (author): A poetic antithesis and paronomasia is heavy; Abu Tammam's repeated throat sounds likewise faulted. BAQILLANI (author): Poetic phrase about eating colocynth is neither pleasing nor apt. BAQILLANI (author): A poetic line has sound meaning but awkward style. BAQILLANI (author): Horse description lacks transition; Abu Tammam handles transitions better."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p16", "position": "Sībawayh analyzes the frequent kinship vocative ibn umm as a compound.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Yā ibn akhī and yā ibn abī retain yāʾ because ibn, not the possessor, is vocative. SIBAWAYH (author): Common yā ibn umm and yā ibn ʿamm fuse because more frequent than forms with yāʾ. SIBAWAYH (author): One account fuses pair into one name then adds possessive yāʾ, like yā aḥada ʿashar. SIBAWAYH (author): Another deletes possessive yāʾ due to frequent use. SIBAWAYH (author): Abu al-Najm's yā ibnata ʿammā attests omission of possessive yāʾ. SIBAWAYH (author): Analogical new forms of the two patterns are grammatical. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh heard these forms from Khalil and Yunus from Arabs."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p17", "position": "Sībawayh explains where tanwīn remains when a noun is completed by a following phrase.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Negation and vocative delete only at a completed noun's end; earlier deletion is disfavored. SIBAWAYH (author): Khalil treats bi-l-maʿrūf as completing āmiran when integrated, otherwise an adjunct. SIBAWAYH (author): Attaching yawm al-jumʿa changes whether Friday commanders or all commanders at Friday are negated. SIBAWAYH (author): In lā ḍāriban yawm al-jumʿa, day completes noun phrase so tanwin remains. SIBAWAYH (author): Tanwin behaves like an inserted letter before the noun phrase's end. SIBAWAYH (author): Here lā governs only an indefinite, which behaves as definite vocative."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p18", "position": "Al-Samīn discusses related words for blessing a sneezer and their derivations.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says the form with shīn is the more elevated of the two ways of saying a prayer for a sneezer. SAMIN-DURR (ثعلب): Thaʿlab says the original is the form with sīn, from samt, meaning direction and guidance. SAMIN-DURR (author): One explanation of the shīn form of the sneezer's prayer is a wish that God steady the sneezer as an animal's legs are steady. SAMIN-DURR (author): Another explanation treats the intensive form as privative: may God remove gloating from the sneezer; with sīn it means restoring him to his former condition after his disturbance. SAMIN-DURR (أبو بكر): Abū Bakr records the usages سمته and سمت عليه, including the hadith wording وسمت عليهما."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p19", "position": "Al-Zarkashī states broader rhetorical and exegetical principles.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): The core of eloquence is placing each word in its most fitting position: replacing it either changes meaning or diminishes the speech’s beauty, since apparent synonyms retain distinct senses. BURHAN (author): A surah combines topics of different kinds to provide broader benefit; isolating each subject in its own surah would let an opponent see proof in only one kind at a time. BURHAN (author): A figurative or metonymic reading is used only when the wording cannot be carried on its literal sense; the passage rejects the preceding figurative reading. BURHAN (author): Whether metonymy requires a contextual indicator depends on the earlier dispute over whether metonymy counts as metaphor. BURHAN (عبد القادر الجرجاني): Abd al-Qahir al-Jurjani states in al-Dala'il that metonymy necessarily has a contextual indicator. BURHAN (القاضي argues against): The Qadi rejects calling the Qur’an sajʿ: sajʿ belongs to ordinary speech and to soothsayers, so the label undermines inimitability and prophecy more than the rejected label of poetry. BURHAN (القاضي argues against): A cadence-like surface does not make Qur’anic speech sajʿ: in sajʿ wording follows meaning for rhyme, whereas the Qur’an’s wording follows its intended meaning."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p20", "position": "Ibn al-Jazarī contrasts genuine and connective hamzas.", "reasons": "NASHR (author): هاؤم is built from هاء meaning take plus a connected plural pronoun, unlike the tanbih hāʾ in هؤلاء and ها أنتم; its hamza is genuine, while هاوم is softened between-between and can be paused on mīm."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p21", "position": "Ancillary Torah sayings or Qur'anic orthography accompany the scene.", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): In joined orthography, يوم هم, لات حين, and ابن أم are written together; in Ṭā Hā the hamza is written as wāw and the hamza of ابن is omitted, yielding يبنؤم."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p22", "position": "Other material in IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL concerns the scene or its interpretive method.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL (author): Ibn Qutayba's catalogue of disputed readings lies outside this book."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p23", "position": "Other material in ALUSI-FULL concerns the scene or its interpretive method.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Several names are proposed for Moses and Aaron's mother; some claim her name has occult power to unlock locks through ritual practices, which Alusi dismisses as invented asceticism without divine warrant."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q40", "question": "How is بِئْسَمَا read and how are its variant forms derived?", "turns_on": "Hamza lightening, vowel transfer, morphological pattern, and whether the reported form can stand in the construction with mā.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q40/p1", "position": "The common biʾsa form has an assimilated vowel pattern.", "reasons": "Ibn Jinnī compares the mainstream form's vowel assimilation with fakhidh and shahid."}, {"id": "7:150/q40/p2", "position": "A softened bays or bīs form comes from lightening the hamza, transferring its vowel to yāʾ, and possibly dropping a vowel; Ibn Jinnī analyzes the geminated form as fayʿil.", "reasons": "Ibn Jinnī compares the reduction with ʿalima, kalima, and fakhidh, and cites poetic shiyā for shayʾ against Ibn Mujāhid's fiʿl analysis. He notes bāʾis as the active participle of biʾs."}, {"id": "7:150/q40/p3", "position": "A baʾs reading is a lightened biʾs.", "reasons": "Ibn Jinnī compares its lightening with saʾima becoming saʾama and with the reduction of ʿalima."}, {"id": "7:150/q40/p4", "position": "Abū Ḥātim reports a baʾīs form on two patterns, including one with initial kasra following the hamza, and a biʾs form on faʿl.", "reasons": "Abū Ḥātim compares the reported patterns with ḥadhīm, shaʿīr, and baʿīr."}, {"id": "7:150/q40/p5", "position": "Abū Ḥātim rejects a reported biʾs vocalization and al-Ḥasan's reading because this construction must accompany mā.", "reasons": "Abū Ḥātim cites biʾsamā and niʿma mā as the required construction."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
