<<chunk 114, part 4 of 0..5>>
TABI (author): God tests effort in collecting dispersed Qur'anic material, raising learned believers. KHATTABI (author): Claim that a successful imitation was concealed is rejected as implausible transmission. KHATTABI (author): Objector cites Musaylima's frog, pregnant-woman, and elephant parodies. KHATTABI (author): Musaylima's frog passage is incoherent and forced rhyme, failing eloquence. KHATTABI (author): A wine poem gains wealth, pleasure, and solace in a revision accepted by listener. KHATTABI (author): Literary comparison ranks poets by detailed treatment within each subject. KHATTABI (author): Quraysh produced no genuine answer to Qur'anic challenge. KHATTABI (author): Elephant parody's grand opening ends with trivial trunk and tail, unlike 69:1 and 101:1."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p9", "position": "Sībawayh distinguishes collective nouns from broken plurals by form, agreement, and diminutives.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Rukb and safar are collectives, shown by diminutives rukayb and sufayr. SIBAWAYH (author): Ṭayr and ṣaḥb are collectives rather than broken plurals. SIBAWAYH (author): Khalil: kamʾa and jabʾa are collectives; diminutive kumayʾa supports it. SIBAWAYH (author): Adam is a collective corresponding to adīm, as ufuq and ʿamad. SIBAWAYH (author): Yunus reports masculine huwa al-ʿamad for collective ʿamad. SIBAWAYH (author): Ḥalaq and fulk are collectives, unlike the broken plural ẓulam. SIBAWAYH (author): Abu al-Khattab reports nashfa / nashf for a rubbing stone. SIBAWAYH (author): Jāmil and bāqir are collectives by masculine agreement and diminutive. SIBAWAYH (author): Akh / ikhwa and sarī / sarāt are not ordinary broken plurals; weak-root analogies support this. SIBAWAYH (author): Fārih / farha pattern like ṣāḥib / ṣuḥba. SIBAWAYH (author): Ghayb and khadam are collectives like adam, with Imruʾ al-Qays attesting ghazī."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p10", "position": "Sībawayh surveys ibn compounds and loss of tanwīn in vocative names.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In ibnm and imruʾ, internal consonant follows case-ending vowel. SIBAWAYH (author): Banū al-Ḥarmāz poet uses yā Ḥakam ibn al-Mundhir. SIBAWAYH (author): Al-ʿAjjāj uses yā ʿUmar ibn Muʿammar. SIBAWAYH (author): Yā Zayd ibn ʿAmr treats Zayd's vowel as case and ibn follows. SIBAWAYH (author): Frequent Zayd ibn ʿAbd Allāh and Hind bint ʿAbd Allāh omit tanwin as one name. SIBAWAYH (author): Alternative drops tanwin to avoid adjacent vowelless letters, not due to compounding. SIBAWAYH (author): Frequency also explains deletion in ladu al-ṣalāh and similar phrases. SIBAWAYH (author): Alternative uses Hind bint fulān for phonetic easing rather than compounding. SIBAWAYH (author): Yunus calls the dialect widespread and good. SIBAWAYH (author): Yā Zayd ibn akhīnā keeps ibn separate, since corresponding statement is not compound. SIBAWAYH (author): Zayd in yā Zayd ibn ʿAmr is accusative, while umm in yā ibn umm is genitive."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p11", "position": "Bint al-Shāṭiʾ discusses inimitability, literary inquiry, and Quraysh's response.", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ (البقاعى): Al-Biqāʿī attributed the opposition to his work to envy, as Haji Khalifa reports. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): She traces summaries of Qur’anic inimitability from al-Zarkashī’s eighth-century Burhān to al-Suyūṭī’s chapter in al-Itqān. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (محمد عبده): Muḥammad ʿAbduh says he wrote a concise treatment because Muslims urgently needed the subject, and that no one had done justice to Qur’anic arrangement and style. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (مصطفى صادق الرافعى): Al-Rāfiʿī surveyed the Qur’anic library and judged that it contained nothing significant, according to the excerpt. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): Quraysh tried to divert seasonal visitors from hearing the Qur’an, blocked Muslim recitation in the sanctuary, and persecuted converts to prevent its influence. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): The Qur’an’s message steadily won believers, weakened idolatry, and persecution streng thened Muslims’ resolve and endurance. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): Quraysh accused the Prophet of fabricating the Qur’an strategically to cast doubt among people attached to inherited religion, custom, and tribal power, not because they believed the charge or could imitate it. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (القاضي عبد الجبار): ʿAbd al-Jabbār argues their conduct shows they were not genuinely doubtful: some accepted the Qur’an, opponents revered it, and they turned to war. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الباقلاني): Al-Bāqillānī says Qur’anic composition exceeds the customary eloquence of both humans and jinn, citing the challenge to bring its like. | mentions 17:88 BINTSHATI-IJAZ (معترض): An objection says human inability cannot establish that jinn are unable, since jinn might possess subtle powers beyond human reach. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الباقلاني): Al-Bāqillānī answers that revelation can establish jinn’s inability; preserved Arabic reports of jinn poetry are no more eloquent than human speech, and the excerpt cites poets associated with ghoul lore. | mentions 17:88 BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author argues against): Bint al-Shāṭiʾ argues that scholarly disagreement is legitimate and no interpreter may claim the definitive word on the inimitable Qur’an."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p12", "position": "Ibn Kathīr discusses Qur'an collection and early reciters.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Zayd b. Thābit recounts that after Yamāma ʿUmar feared the deaths of Qurʾan reciters would erase much of it and persuaded Abū Bakr to collect it; Zayd initially objected that the Prophet had not done so, then gathered it from writing materials and memories. The sheets passed from Abū Bakr to ʿUmar to Ḥafṣa. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathīr calls Abū Bakr’s collection one of his greatest deeds, linking it to the divine promise to preserve the Reminder and to the community’s ability to memorize the whole Qurʾan. | mentions 15:9 IBNKATHIR-FULL (علي بن أبي طالب): ʿAlī says Abū Bakr earned the greatest reward for the codices because he was the first to gather the Qurʾan between two covers; Ibn Kathīr grades the chain ṣaḥīḥ. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): A person may state what he knows about himself when needed, even if others do not know it; Joseph’s claim to be a capable, trustworthy treasurer is the Qurʾanic precedent, and the Prophet’s instruction to learn from four praised the named reciter. | mentions 12:55 IBNKATHIR-FULL (عمر): A report from ʿUmar says whoever wants to recite the Qurʾan fresh as revealed should recite in Ibn Umm ʿAbd’s manner; Ibn Kathīr notes routes through Aḥmad, al-Tirmidhī, and al-Nasāʾī, and says al-Dāraquṭnī authenticated it. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو هريرة): A report from Abū Hurayra repeats the instruction to recite as freshly revealed in the reading of Ibn Umm ʿAbd, identified as ʿAbd Allāh b. Masʿūd. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports that four Anṣārī Companions had gathered the Qurʾan in the Prophet’s lifetime: Ubayy b. Kaʿb, Muʿādh b. Jabal, Zayd b. Thābit, and Abū Zayd; Muslim also transmits the report. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أنس بن مالك): A second Anas wording names Abū al-Dardāʾ rather than Ubayy among the four who had gathered the Qurʾan, adding that Anas’s group inherited it. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathīr rejects a literal reading that only these four Companions gathered the Qurʾan: other Muhājirūn certainly did too, so Anas likely meant only the Anṣār; the lists differ over Ubayy versus Abū al-Dardāʾ. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الواقدي): Abū Zayd was otherwise little known, and al-Wāqidī identifies him as Qays b. al-Sakan b. Qays b. Zawʿā b. Ḥarām b. Jundub b. ʿĀmir b. Ghanm b. ʿAdī b. al-Najjār."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p13", "position": "Al-Ālūsī discusses the seven aḥruf and collection of the Qur'an.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): The excerpt li sts possible sevenfold divisions such as clear and ambiguous, abrogating and abrogated, general and particular, narratives, commands, prohibitions, promises, and guidance; it says these are plausible but lack evidence for privileging one. ALUSI-FULL (author): For al-Ālūsī, differing Companion readings and their transmission across tribal dialects show that the aḥruf rest on prophetic narration rather than a reader’s dialect knowledge; he favors the seven-dialect account. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Al-Ālūsī begins his discussion of Quran collection by saying it was first collected in the Prophet’s presence, citing al-Ḥākim with a chain meeting the criteria of al-Bukhārī and Muslim from Zayd b. Thābit. ALUSI-FULL (ثعلب): The view that the seven aḥruf are seven dialects is attributed to Thaʿlab, Abū ʿUbayd, al-Azharī, and others; Ibn ʿAṭiyya chose it and al-Bayhaqī authenticated it. ALUSI-FULL (author): To answer the objection that Arabic has more than seven dialects, proponents say the count means the most eloquent: Quraysh, Hudhayl, Tamim, Azd, Rabiʿa, Hawazin, and Saʿd b. Bakr. ALUSI-FULL (أبو علي الأهوازي): Abū ʿAlī al-Ahwāzī resolves Ibn Qutayba’s objection by locating the seven dialects within Quraysh. ALUSI-FULL (author): The seven dialects need not apply to every word; rather, they are distributed through the Quran, with some dialectal forms more prominent than others. ALUSI-FULL (عمر): Another view confines the seven dialects to Mudar, based on ʿUmar’s statement; some proponents identify them as Hudhayl, Kināna, Qays, Ḍabba, Taym al-Ribāb, Asad b. Khuzayma, and Quraysh. ALUSI-FULL (author): A further account says revelation began in Quraysh and neighboring eloquent tribes, then the Prophet permitted dialectal recitation to relieve hardship and tribal resistance, based on what he transmitted rather than personal choice. ALUSI-FULL (author): On this account, Gabriel brought one aḥruf to the Prophet at each presentation until the full revelation was complete. ALUSI-FULL (السيوطي argues against): Al-Suyūṭī rejects the dialect explanation: ʿUmar and Hishām were both Qurashī yet recited differently, so ʿUmar’s objection cannot concern a dialect difference; the seven aḥruf mean something else. ALUSI-F
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
