<<chunk 114, part 3 of 0..5>>
s poetry shows. SIBAWAYH (author): Khalil: ithnā ʿashar has case on ithnā/ithnay, with ʿashar like tanwin and omitted in personal naming. SIBAWAYH (author): Akhwal akhwal can be a joined expression or adverbial repetition."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p5", "position": "Ibn al-Jazarī details general rules and routes for hamza and possessive yāʾ.", "reasons": "NASHR (author): Before alif-lām, a transferred vowel does not restore a preceding madd letter or the original sukun; the consonant is moved and the madd is omitted, a rule agreed by reciters despite Arabic alternatives. | mentions 20:21, 82:1, 4:59, 30:50, 10:51, 24:32, 4:58, 72:9, 77:16, 80:24, 6:103, 6:136, 15:3, 3:139 NASHR (author): Grammarians apply two analyses: count the transferred vowel or treat it as accidental; each analysis entails consistent rules for connection, starting, and whether a hamza follows. NASHR (ثعلب عن سلمة عن الفراء): Thaʿlab transmits al-Farrāʾ’s line as poetic evidence for counting the transferred vowel, including the connected form بلان. NASHR (ابن محيصن): Ibn Muḥayṣin reads examples such as عن الله, عن الأنفال, and من الآثمين with the nun silent and assimilated, analogous to the reading عادًا لولى. NASHR (أبو شامة): Abū Shāma divides Warsh’s transferred-vowel cases: when no later restoration shows recognition, the lam remains as if silent, so a reader beginning there uses hamzat al-waṣl. NASHR (حمزة وخلف عن حمزة): Route one: pause with sakt, verify the second ḍamma hamza, and ease the third between the two vowels; sources assign it to Ḥamza and Khalaf. NASHR (أبو العز عن أهل واسط وبغداد): Route ten is route nine with the third hamza replaced by yāʾ; al-Kifāya al-Kubrā and Ghāyat Abī al-ʿAlāʾ include it, as does Abū al-ʿIzz’s report from Wāsiṭ and Baghdad. NASHR (الأخفش والحافظ أبو العلاء الداني وخلف): Route two uses sakt and verifies the second hamza but substitutes a ḍamma yāʾ for the third; al-Dānī selects it, and al-Shāṭibiyya and al-Taysīr give it for Khalaf. NASHR (حمزة وخلاد): Route three omits sakt on the lām, verifies the first and second hamzas, and eases the third between vowels; it is listed for Ḥamza and Khallād. NASHR (خلاد والحافظ الداني): Route four likewise omits sakt and verifies the first two hamzas, but substitutes yāʾ for the third; al-Dānī selects it for the no-sakt option. NASHR (حمزة وخلف عن حمزة): Route five pauses with sakt on the lām and eases the second hamza between vowels; it is listed for Ḥamza and Khalaf. NASHR (الحافظ الداني وخلف): Route six is route five with the third hamza replaced by yāʾ; al-Dānī selects it for sakt, and al-Shāṭibiyya and al-Taysīr include it for Khalaf. NASHR (صاحب الهداية لحمزة وخلاد): Route seven omits sakt and eases both the second and third hamzas between vowels; it is selected by the author of al-Hidāya for Ḥamza and transmitted for Khallād. NASHR (الحافظ الداني): Route eight is route seven with the third hamza replaced by yāʾ; al-Dānī selects it for the no-sakt option. NASHR (جمهور العراقيين): Route nine uses transfer rather than sakt, with the second and third hamzas both eased between vowels; it appears in al-Rawḍa, al-Shāṭibiyya, and most Iraqi transmission. NASHR (author): Yāʾ al-iḍāfa is the speaker’s attached pronoun: it is genitive with a noun and governed by verbs or particles, though the traditional label is sometimes used loosely. NASHR (author): Possessive yāʾs are written in the codex, always extra to the word stem, and vary between fatḥa and sukūn; yāʾs of addition are omitted in codices, may be lexical or extra, and vary by deletion or retention. NASHR (أئمة القراء): Most possessive yāʾs are agreed to be silent: the source counts 566 such instances and explains this as the original form. NASHR (أئمة القراء): Readers agree to open possessive yāʾs in eleven words across eighteen places, generally to avoid a meeting of sukūns and by analogy; examples include نعمتي and حسبي الله. NASHR (الجعبري وغيره من المتأخرين argues against): Al-Jaʿbarī and later scholars allow 27 combinations by multiplying three choices at each hamza position; Ibn al-Jazarī says only the ten configurations he listed are valid."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p6", "position": "Al-Jurjānī examines poetic likeness, communication, and Qur'anic order.", "reasons": "JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu al-Atahiya's image of praise opened by virtues parallels Abu Tammam's image of gifts stringing praise like pearls for an inarticulate tongue. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu Wajza and Mansur al-Namri both picture generosity as streams or valleys converging at the praised man. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Bashshar's hated gray hair that one hates to lose is echoed by al-Buhturi's complaint that beauties criticize his gray hair, which he cannot enjoy as a flaw. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu Tammam makes tomorrow long for the perfected man and yesterday yearn toward him; Ibn al-Rumi's distinctive image is a grieving glance from yesterday working toward him. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu Tammam says wolves and vultures cannot repay the morning's benefit; al-Mutanabbi recasts the image as beasts of prey praising the benefactor's generosity. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu Tammam contrasts souls close despite distance and bodies near yet estranged; al-Mutanabbi pictures hearts meeting in bodies that do not meet. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Abu Haffan says the age is wholly harmful except for Ibn Yahya, its one grace; al-Mutanabbi depicts days relieved of blame as though their children were guilty and the addressee their excuse. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Ali ibn Jabala says nights return lost strength as wisdom and understanding; Ibn al-Mu'tazz says lost youth increases men's judgment and intellect. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Ordinary speakers understand one another's purposes necessarily; understanding a sentence's meaning therefore requires no extra evidence beyond its wording. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): A sign must inform its hearer of what it signifies, and conversation aims to disclose the speaker's purpose; otherwise the proposed meaning would not be conveyed by the words. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): Examining Qur'anic passages verse by verse reveals no misplaced or inferior word, but an order and precision that dazzle minds, defeat the public, and silence eloquent challengers. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): The quoted poem criticizes people who make claims without understanding them and cannot substantiate them when challenged. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): A student should investigate the Qur'an's stylistic qualities and why its effects exceed human capacity instead of merely memorizing the apparent wording of proofs. JURJANI-DALAIL (author): The way to understand these qualities is to examine Arabic speech and poetry comprehensively, tracing each topic with evidence and examples. JURJANI-DALAIL (author argues against): If a report merely communicated that its predicate exists in its subject, a polytheist asserting another god would intend to teach that such a god exists, exposing the theory's absurdity. JURJANI-DALAIL (author argues against): The rival account would make every heard report certainly true, despite reports admitting falsehood; it would also erase the distinction between solitary and mass-transmitted reports and remove the need for miracles."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p7", "position": "The collection records maxims attributed to the Torah.", "reasons": "DURR-FULL (author): The fragment commends truthful speech, keeping promises, honoring trusts, and guarding the hands, eyes, and sexual organs. DURR-FULL (كعب): Ka'b says the Torah promises longevity and ease and the removal of hardship to one who fears God, honors parents, and maintains kinship. DURR-FULL (كردوس الثعلبي): Kurdus al-Tha'labi gives Torah maxims to practice piety, show mercy, and repent so that mercy and acceptance follow. DURR-FULL (أبو الجوزاء): Abu al-Jawza says the Torah teaches that someone seeking life and certain knowledge should continually resist worldly desires, driving Satan away. DURR-FULL (كعب): Ka'b recounts that God had Gabriel bring two tablets from a tree in Paradise, which became light when touched by God and stone when Moses took them; after Moses angrily seized Aaron, Aaron said he feared being blamed for dividing Israel, and Moses sought forgiveness as the tablets shattered. DURR-FULL (مالك بن دينار): Malik ibn Dinar says the Torah teaches that increased knowledge brings increased awe or gravity. DURR-FULL (مالك بن دينار): Malik ibn Dinar says the Torah treats someone who fails to forbid a sinful neighbor as that neighbor's accomplice. DURR-FULL (قتادة): A Torah saying portrays a person remembering and calling on God while forgetting and fleeing from Him, although God provides for him and he worships another. DURR-FULL (الوليد بن عمر): A reported Torah saying promises provision when a person works with his hands and urges obedience because God knows what benefits him. DURR-FULL (عقبة بن زينب): The Torah warns against relying on mortal people, urges trust in the Living One who never dies, and observes that Moses died, asking who will not die. DURR-FULL (وهب بن منبه): Wahb ibn Munabbih says God loves the one who hates worldly life and honors the one who treats it lightly, while hating and humiliating those who love and honor it. DURR-FULL (عروة): Urwa says the Torah teaches that a pleasant face and kind speech make one more beloved than people who give gifts. DURR-FULL (عروة): Urwa reports a Torah maxim that mercy shown to others is returned in kind."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p8", "position": "Al-Khaṭṭābī discusses rare words, Qur'anic eloquence, and failed imitation.", "reasons": "KHATTABI (author): Al-Asmai avoided glossing rare Qur'anic words, citing an idiom for shaghaf. KHATTABI (author): Prophet urges learning Qur'anic inflection and rare vocabulary; report ungraded. KHATTABI (author): Quraysh could not meet Qur'anic challenge and resorted to fighting. KHATTABI (author): Objector says ordinary Arabic could be matched; war avoided lengthy verbal dispute. KHAT
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
