<<chunk 114, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "7:150/q34", "question": "What does Aaron ask in وَلَا تَجْعَلْنِي مَعَ ٱلْقَوْمِ ٱلظَّالِمِينَ?", "turns_on": "Whether he fears punishment, rebuke, or being judged guilty.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q34/p1", "position": "Do not judge Aaron guilty or treat him as a wrongdoer.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (author): Aaron asks not to be grouped with the wrongdoers, the calf worshippers. MUQATIL (author): Moses dragged Aaron by the head; Aaron said the people overpowered and nearly killed him and asked not to delight enemies or count him with wrongdoers. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Aaron asks Moses not to be angry with him as with the wrongdoers, since he was not one of them; this softened Moses. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Aaron asks Moses not to let the calf worshippers rejoice over him by striking or humiliating him, or count him among the wrongdoers. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): ‘The people weakened me’ means the calf worshippers overpowered Aaron and nearly killed him; he asks Moses not to let the enemies rejoice or count him among the wrongdoers, meaning calf worshippers. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The wrongdoing people Aaron asks not to be grouped with are the worshippers of the calf. TABRISI (author): Aaron asks Moses not to make the enemies rejoice through an act whose outward appearance suggests disrespect, and not to group him with calf worshippers as one of the wrongdoers. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets the wrongdoers Moses asks not to join as the people who worshipped the calf. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Aaron first asks that Moses not give the enemies a visible cause for gloating, then asks not to be judged or treated as one of the wrongdoers, a less visible inner judgment. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Aaron asks Moses not to delight their enemies or count him among the wrongdoers, meaning not to treat him as one of them. BIQAI-FULL (author): Aaron says the people intimidated him and nearly killed him for objecting; he asks Moses not to let their enemies rejoice at his humiliation or count him among the wrongdoers. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid explains Moses's plea not to be counted with the wrongdoers as a plea not to be counted with the calf worshippers. BURSEVI (author): In the inward reading, Aaron is the heart, Moses the spirit, and their enemies the ego, Satan, and desire; the wrongdoers are heart’s qualities that worship the calf of the world. ELMALILI (author): Harun says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him, then asks Moses not to give their enemies cause to gloat or count him among the unjust; he disowns their actions and says he did not deserve blame for failing to stop them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): “Do not make me one of the wrongdoers” may mean do not consider me one of them, with “make” meaning “think,” as at 43:19. | mentions 43:19 TABATABAI (هارون): Aaron says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him because he opposed their calf worship; he asks Moses not to let enemies gloat or count him among wrongdoers. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Aaron asked Moses not to make him ridiculous before the unjust calf-worshippers or treat him as one of them, since they were angry at Aaron's opposition."}, {"id": "7:150/q34/p2", "position": "Do not punish or rebuke Aaron along with the wrongdoers.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Aaron asks Moses not to include him among the wrongdoers in his anger and punishment. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Aaron asks not to be grouped with the wrongdoers in Moses' anger and punishment, or not to be regarded as one of them despite his innocence. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Aaron asks Moses not to count him among the wrongdoers in his anger and punishment of him; the wrongdoers are the calf worshippers. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Do not count me among the unjust” means do not include him among them by punishing or accusing him of negligence. NASAFI-FULL (author): The enemies are the calf worshippers; Moses should not do what they wish by humiliating or harming Aaron, or treat him as one of the wrongdoers by sharing his anger with them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The final plea can mean that Moses should not make Aaron a companion of the wrongdoers in his anger. BURSEVI (author): Aaron asks not to be counted among the wrongdoers through punishment or accusation of failure. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aaron asks not to be counted among the wrongdoers, not to be treated like them in the rebuke, or not to be considered one of them when innocent of their deeds. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Aaron’s request not to let enemies gloat or count him among wrongdoers follows his explanation and indirectly asks Moses to refrain from punishing him. STUDYQURAN (author): Aaron asks not to be classed with wrongdoers, meaning not to be judged guilty of idolatry and punished with the others. THALABI (author): Aaron asks not to share calf worshippers' punishment. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Alternatively, Aaron asks not to be punished with the calf worshippers, whom Moses had ordered killed; here “make” retains its basic sense. ALUSI-FULL (author): The construction of جعل here resembles the Qur'anic usage in which people made the angels female. | mentions 43:19"}]}
{"id": "7:150/q35", "question": "Who are the wrongdoers?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q35/p1", "position": "The wrongdoers are the calf worshippers.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (author): Aaron asks not to be grouped with the wrongdoers, the calf worshippers. TAB-FULL (author): Mujahid: wrongdoers are calf worshippers. IBNABIHATIM (author): Mujahid: wrongdoers are calf worshippers. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Aaron asks Moses not to let the calf worshippers rejoice over him by striking or humiliating him, or count him among the wrongdoers. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): ‘The people weakened me’ means the calf worshippers overpowered Aaron and nearly killed him; he asks Moses not to let the enemies rejoice or count him among the wrongdoers, meaning calf worshippers. TABRISI (author): Aaron asks Moses not to make the enemies rejoice through an act whose outward appearance suggests disrespect, and not to group him with calf worshippers as one of the wrongdoers. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Aaron asks Moses not to count him among the wrongdoers in his anger and punishment of him; the wrongdoers are the calf worshippers. NASAFI-FULL (author): The enemies are the calf worshippers; Moses should not do what they wish by humiliating or harming Aaron, or treat him as one of the wrongdoers by sharing his anger with them. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid explains Moses's plea not to be counted with the wrongdoers as a plea not to be counted with the calf worshippers. TABATABAI (هارون): Aaron says the people overpowered him and nearly killed him because he opposed their calf worship; he asks Moses not to let enemies gloat or count him among wrongdoers."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q36", "question": "How does this account relate to the account in Ṭā Hā?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q36/p1", "position": "Ṭā Hā adds Moses' rebuke and Aaron's fear that division would follow stronger action.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Ibn Ishaq: seeing calf worship, Moses threw tablets and grabbed Aaron's head and beard, 20:93. TAB-FULL (author): Moses seized Aaron for remaining with Israelites rather than following him; he accepted fear of division as excuse, 20:93–94. QUSHAYRI (author): Harun says “son of my mother” to soften Moses and appeal for mercy. | mentions 20:94 QUSHAYRI (author): Harun's plea about his beard and head says he has endured repeated ordeals and asks Moses not to add to his suffering but to console him. | mentions 20:94 WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari explains that Moses reproached Aaron for not reporting the people's grave apostasy, and seized him because he thought Aaron had failed God by staying behind; Aaron explained that the people nearly killed him, after which Moses's suspicion passed and he prayed for both.  | mentions 20:92 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses seized Aaron by his forelock and hair, reproaching him for not following him to tell him what Israel had done; the point recalls the exchange in Ṭā Hā. | mentions 20:92 TABRISI (أبو مسلم): A fifth explanation is that Moses rebuked Aaron for asking, as in Ṭā Hā, why he had not followed him when he saw the people stray. | mentions 20:92 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Moses thought Aaron had disobeyed by staying with the people instead of following him and reporting their new act, so he could return and correct them. | mentions 20:92 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Tabari says God informed Moses before he returned that his people had been seduced by the calf, explaining his anger; the author links this to the verse in Ta-Ha. | mentions 20:85 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (هارون): Aaron's appeal that Moses not seize him by beard or head, and his fear of dividing Israel, is quoted from Ta-Ha. | mentions 20:94 IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Moses grabs Aaron because he fears Aaron failed to restrain the people; the parallel account in Ṭā Hā explains Aaron feared Moses would accuse him of dividing Israel or disobeying. | mentions 20:92, 20:93, 20:94 ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking Aaron by the head means grasping his hair, the customary way to hold a head; this can coexist with the Ta-Ha account of taking his beard, either by inclusion or by extending the grasp. | mentions 20:94 TABATABAI (author): Moses threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head, dragging him toward himself; Ta-Ha recounts Moses asking why Aaron did not follow the people when they strayed. | mentions 20:93 TABATABAI (author): The opening says Moses already knew of the people's apostasy before seeing them, because God told him at the appointment, as Ta-Ha recounts. | mentions 20:85 TABATABAI (هارون): Aaron explains in Ta-Ha that he feared Moses would accuse him of dividing the Israelites and disregarding his instruction. | mentions 20:94 ASAD-NOTES (author): Asad says Aaron's guilt was passivity before idolatry, motivated by fear of splitting the people.
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
