<<chunk 114, part 1 of 0..5>>
 | mentions 20:92, 20:93, 20:94 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): 20:94 reports Aaron considered further measures to stop calf worship but feared the matter would split the people and Moses would accuse him of causing division. | mentions 20:94 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Moses, deeply shaken, threw down the Torah tablets and seized Aaron by the head or hair, thinking he had allowed the calf worship; 20:92–93 says Moses blamed him for not coming to report it. | mentions 20:92, 20:93 STUDYQURAN (author): The Quran gives another account of Moses’ confrontation with Aaron. | mentions 20:92, 20:93, 20:94 STUDYQURAN (author): Aaron says the people were prepared to kill him; elsewhere he explains that stronger action might have made him blamed for causing discord. | mentions 20:94 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): He poses but does not answer the question of why al-A'raf retains يا in ابن أم while Taha omits it. | mentions 7:150 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): Including a particle can also serve emphasis, in addition to marking a detailed context. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author argues against): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects the report that Moses merely took Aaron aside to speak and prefers the literal angry seizure, citing Aaron’s reminder that Moses left Israel divided and ignored his counsel. | mentions 20:94"}]}
{"id": "7:150/q37", "question": "What practical or legal lessons are drawn from the episode?", "turns_on": "Different rulings on fear while forbidding wrong, anger, gloating, and ecstatic conduct.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q37/p1", "position": "Anger calls for restraint and purification, while its legal effects are disputed.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Moses was angry at his people for worshipping the calf and grieved because God had tested them. | mentions 20:85 WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba also prefers the anger sense, glossing the verb as making someone angry and becoming angry. | mentions 43:55 QURTUBI-FULL (عطية): The Prophet said anger comes from Satan, who was created from fire, and fire is extinguished with water; an angry person should perform ablution. No grading is stated. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن العربي): Ibn al-ʿArabī says anger does not alter legal rulings as some claim: Moses' actions continued in their ordinary course despite his anger. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو ذر): A report in Abū Dāwūd's Muṣannaf from Abū Dharr says the Prophet advised an angry person who is standing to sit; if anger remains, to lie down. No grading is stated. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو وائل القاص): Abū Wāʾil recounts that ʿUrwa ibn Muḥammad became angry with a visitor, left, returned after ablution, and then reported a Prophetic teaching transmitted through his father and grandfather ʿAṭiyya. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Anger is like an ember burning in the heart; the Prophet instructed an angry person to lie down, and, if anger remained, to bathe, extinguishing it with rest and water. SAMIN-DURR (author): Alternatively أسفا is apposition to غضبان: partitive if it means intensely angry, or apposition of inclusion if it means grieved; their closeness makes this possible."}, {"id": "7:150/q37/p2", "position": "Fear of being killed can excuse silence while forbidding wrong.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Moses learned Aaron was innocent of blame because Aaron had protested so strongly that he feared being killed. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Aaron's fear that the people would kill him shows that a person who fears being killed while forbidding wrong may remain silent. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Aaron’s “they nearly killed me” shows that he resisted them forcefully and then yielded for fear of being killed."}, {"id": "7:150/q37/p3", "position": "Ecstasy does not excuse deliberate damage or forbidden conduct.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عقيل): Those who knowingly enter places where music overwhelms their reason are responsible for the resulting damage; legal duties remain because they were warned before entering. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عقيل): If the claimed ecstasy is genuine, it is natural intoxication; if false, people act corruptly while sober, so neither account makes it safe and avoiding doubtful settings is obligatory. QURTUBI-FULL (author argues against): He rejects the Sufi analogy between Moses' act and ecstatic musicians throwing or tearing clothes while claiming loss of awareness excuses them. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو الفرج الجوزي argues against): Even if the tablets broke, one cannot infer Moses meant to break them or claim he was unconscious; such an extreme hypothetical does not excuse people who knowingly attend music. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عقيل argues against): Ibn ʿAqīl calls ecstatic behavior and tearing clothes wrong and forbidden, citing the Prophet's prohibition on wasting wealth."}, {"id": "7:150/q37/p4", "position": "Commands and prohibitions may be given for admonition even when the outcome is known.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): It is permissible to forbid what one knows a person will not do, or command what one knows they will do, to admonish, teach others, and secure a shared benefit. JISHUMI (author): The people protected worldly interests while neglecting religion, which prompted their objection; the excerpt ends before completing the point."}, {"id": "7:150/q37/p5", "position": "Gloating over another's misfortune is forbidden.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (author): Shamāta is rejoicing at a brother's religious or worldly misfortune; Moses asks that enemies not rejoice, and such gloating is forbidden."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q38", "question": "How is this scene read inwardly?", "turns_on": "Whether the images represent spiritual faculties or Moses' loss of intimate divine communion.", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q38/p1", "position": "Moses figures the spirit, Aaron the heart, and the calf worldly attachment.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (التأويلات النجمية): The inward reading addresses the spirit’s qualities: they hastened back to worldly adornment and attachment before God’s command, interrupting the spiritual journey. BURSEVI (التأويلات النجمية): Seekers and attendants of kings should turn from worldly things during the spiritual path; only after crossing the ego’s and desire’s wastes may they return to guide people to God. BURSEVI (author): In the inward reading, Aaron is the heart, Moses the spirit, and their enemies the ego, Satan, and desire; the wrongdoers are heart’s qualities that worship the calf of the world. BURSEVI (author): The heart itself remains naturally oriented to loving and seeking God, though its qualities can take on the ego’s vices; the ego remains oriented to worldly desire while its qualities pass through spiritual states. ALUSI-FULL (صبغة الله أفندي الحيدري): Haydari's alternative is that Moses lost self-control and the tablets fell involuntarily; describing this as throwing treats failure to restrain himself as intentional, since the righteous are judged by the standard of the spiritually near. BURSEVI (author): If left to itself even briefly, the ego returns to its original nature; God’s established law does not change."}, {"id": "7:150/q38/p2", "position": "Moses' sorrow reflects leaving divine communion for created people.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (بعض المتصوفة): Some Sufis say he was angry at leaving communion with the Real to address created beings. QUSHAYRI (author): Even a harmonious reunion with his people would have been troubled for Moses by losing intimate speech with God and returning to witness created beings. QUSHAYRI (ويقال): An unnamed interpretation assigns the sin to the Israelites and the apologetic to Moses and Harun, as an expression of pure servitude. QURTUBI-FULL (author argues against): He rejects the Sufi analogy between Moses' act and ecstatic musicians throwing or tearing clothes while claiming loss of awareness excuses them."}]}
{"id": "7:150/q39", "question": "What other linguistic, rhetorical, and historical comparisons are attached to these notes?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "7:150/q39/p1", "position": "A source supplies collateral scriptural, orthographic, or historical comparisons.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): Alif, waw, dal, dhal, ra, and zay do not join to a following letter because their written shapes mark breaks and endings; other letters connect within a word. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās’ apparent view was that Muhammad refrained from writing the final document to discipline the people for disputing in his presence. TABATABAI (علي كرم الله وجهه): A reading attributed to ʿAlī renders the word as “juʾār,” with an initial ḍamma and hamza, meaning a loud sound. TABATABAI (author): Reports say the tablets were made of emerald or the lote tree of Paradise, were twelve cubits long, were written while Moses heard the pens, or were preserved inside a mountain or stone in Yemen; the author regards these as unsupported isolated reports unnecessary to exegesis. IBNASHUR-FULL (author argues against): The author rejects that apparent view: Muhammad left the document unwritten because he saw their disagreement and judged it unnecessary for the religion."}, {"id": "7:150/q39/p2", "position": "Al-Jurjānī's examples distinguish metaphor, simile, and visual imagery.", "reasons": "JURJANI-ASRAR (author): Representing sound argument as applying tar to camels’ mange or a butcher’s cutting joins unlike activities to persuasive speech; the unexpected pairing produces mental harmony and acceptance. JURJANI-ASRAR (author): Parable has extraordinary reach: it can present nonexistence as existence, existence as nonexistence, and the dead as alive or the living as dead. JURJANI-ASRAR (author): A person whose good name survives death has a second life, whereas an obscure, low-status person without a remembered legacy is treated as dead or nonexistent. JURJANI-ASRAR (author): Al-Jurjani calls death a renewed life when noble self-sacrifice or brave defense earns lasting fame, citing Kaʿb ibn Māma and signaling a verse by Ibn Nubāta. JURJANI-ASRAR (author): Swords among spear shafts are pictur
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
