<<chunk 129, part 4 of 0..5>>
and Bursevi mention making contention or proofs clear. Alusi says the argument displayed is taught to the human. Ibn Ashur says speech articulates intentions and truth or falsehood by many proofs, including sophistry, and makes mubīn a second predicate of huwa."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q08", "question": "What is the force of the drop-to-disputant contrast?", "turns_on": "Whether the passage's dominant context is proof and benefaction or the denunciation of unbelievers; some readings deliberately include both.", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q08/p1", "position": "It displays God's power and favor in raising inert, weak fluid to articulate intellect and effective argument.", "reasons": "Mawardi and Wahidi's semanticists state the power reading; Ibn Atiyya names the two extremes and, in a broad reading, counts reason and speech as gifts. Ibn Jawzi says humans acquire strength for argument. Razi prefers advocacy with other humans because it fits the proof of a wise creator; Abu Hayyan reports some call the qualities praise, enabling discernment of truth and falsehood. Biqai names speech, understanding and analogical reasoning among human powers. Alusi prefers ability to reason in this blessing context. Elmalili speaks of self-defense; Zamakhshari as reported by Asad emphasizes clear, courageous argument; Asad says Razi supports this reading. Tabatabai admits the blessing reading. Baghawi's general reading includes divine power."}, {"id": "16:4/q08/p2", "position": "It rebukes a creature who forgets his low origin and uses God's gifts to deny Him, His unity, or resurrection and oppose His messengers.", "reasons": "Tabari and Yahya connect the forgotten origin with 36:77–78 and decayed bones. Al-Hasan, reported by Mawardi, calls it gross ingratitude; Wahidi's semanticists contrast disputation of divinity with the gift. Baghawi calls false argument and denial of evident blessings ugly. Ibn Jawzi argues the original creator can restore life. Razi reports this insolence reading but says it fits the creator-proof context less well. Qurtubi hears wonder at disputing God's power. Ibn Kathir says people are created to serve God and cites 25:54–55 and 36:77,79. Abu Hayyan prefers the rebuke because the surrounding and comparable passages, including 36:77 and 43:58, depict human blame. Alusi reports some favor it among unbelievers' offenses and Al-Kashf says it fits 'exalted above their associations'; Alusi himself argues the Ya Sin resurrection context differs. Ibn Ashur specifies defense of partners and rejection of monotheistic callers. Tabatabai prefers rebuke in context. Islahi adds hostility toward God and denial of resurrection tied to 50:3 and 16:27. Elmalili includes association of partners and logical or philosophical opposition. Study Quran's IK, Z and R stress denial of power, blessings and resurrection; IK cites 51:56 for the purpose of service. Kuranyolu says uniquely human freedom to defy God is itself a divine sign."}, {"id": "16:4/q08/p3", "position": "Both capacities are present: eloquent reason is a divine gift that can also become a means of defiance.", "reasons": "Asad explicitly calls the two readings complementary: reason can produce high achievement or error, with 36:77–78 illustrating misuse. Al-Kashf finds both suitable but says the audacity reading incorporates the blessing reading. Ibn Ashur says the sudden expression combines admiration at the rise to rational speech with shock at disobedience."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q09", "question": "What does this transformation prove about God's action?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q09/p1", "position": "Human formation and the rise of intellect require a wise, freely acting creator and show His power, oneness, and ability to restore life.", "reasons": "Razi's conditional argument says homogeneous sperm under necessary natural force would yield a sphere; if heterogeneous, its shifting parts could not reliably place brain, heart and other organs. He rejects joined simple spheres and uniform celestial influence; some physicians instead describe sperm as differentiated through four digestions in stomach, liver, veins and organs, with desire's heat liquefying their material. Razi contrasts the capable chick with the initially less perceptive human infant, whose later knowledge requires governance. Alusi's cited Imam repeats the body, celestial and soul arguments; Alusi says celestial efficacy is refuted elsewhere. Biqai says the transformation shows complete divine power and choice and that original creation implies resurrection; humans' sensory and rational powers reveal a Lord superior to the noblest body below. Elmalili stresses power over a weak drop; Ibn Ashur calls human creation a familiar yet wondrous proof of unique divinity. Tabatabai argues the unity of creation and serviceable blessings requires one governor. Kuranyolu pairs the heavens as great world with the human as small world and notes human agency itself. Abu Hayyan reports Razi's ranking of humans after celestial spheres but rejects the claim that spheres outrank humans."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q10", "question": "What occasion of revelation is reported for this verse?", "turns_on": "Whether the bone-challenge report establishes this verse's occasion or the occasion of the parallel in Yā Sīn.", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q10/p1", "position": "Ubayy ibn Khalaf brought or crumbled a decayed bone, challenged the Prophet to say whether God could revive it, and this verse was revealed about that challenge.", "reasons": "Muqatil adds that Ubayy crushed and scattered the bone in the wind and was later killed by the Prophet at Uhud. Al-Kalbi, Wahidi, Ibn Abbas and al-Hasan through Jishumi, Baghawi, Ibn Atiyya, Ibn Jawzi, Qurtubi, Baydawi, al-Mahdawi through Bursevi, Alusi's report from Wahidi and Study Quran repeat the attribution with minor wording differences. Several connect the same challenge to 36:77–78."}, {"id": "16:4/q10/p2", "position": "The well-known report assigns revelation for Ubayy's bone challenge to the ending of Yā Sīn, not this verse.", "reasons": "Alusi distinguishes the familiar revelation account from this verse, while accepting that Wahidi reports the challenge and its parallel."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q11", "question": "What does a prophetic report add about the child of Adam?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q11/p1", "position": "After God makes and forms a person from a drop, he struts, amasses and withholds wealth, then offers charity only when death is imminent.", "reasons": "Ibn Kathir transmits the address to Adam's child from Busr ibn Jihash from the Prophet; its late charity is too late."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q12", "question": "How does this verse relate to the Ya Sin passage about resurrection?", "turns_on": "Whether parallel wording establishes the same interpretive emphasis despite differing local contexts.", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q12/p1", "position": "Ya Sin 36:77–79 echoes or explicates the drop, disputation, forgotten origin, and challenge to revive bones.", "reasons": "Yahya, Tabari and Qurtubi invoke 36:77–78 for the human's forgotten creation and resurrection denial. Wahidi says 36:77 concerns the same incident; Ibn Jawzi's Nuzha compares Nahl, Maryam 19:67 and Ya Sin. Ibn Kathir also uses 36:79 for the Creator's capacity to revive. Ibn Ashur says Ya Sin makes denial of unity and resurrection explicit. Study Quran notes the wording echoed at 36:77."}, {"id": "16:4/q12/p2", "position": "The Ya Sin parallel does not decide which sense dominates this verse, because its immediate context concerns resurrection denial.", "reasons": "Alusi rejects using 36:78 as decisive for the audacity reading here; he contrasts Ya Sin's resurrection setting with this passage's blessing context. He also says the famous occasion report belongs to Ya Sin's end."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q13", "question": "How does human creation fit the surrounding argument in al-Nahl?", "turns_on": "Whether the local emphasis is the sequence of proofs and blessings or the warning about human resistance; the notes also allow both functions.", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q13/p1", "position": "It follows cosmic creation as a second, more familiar proof of God's oneness, wisdom, and power, before the passage turns to other created benefits.", "reasons": "Razi moves from celestial bodies to the human, which he calls the noblest body after the heavens, and reads body and soul as paired signs. Abu Hayyan contrasts an external cosmic proof with proof from one's own creation. Burhan describes a sequence of heavens, humans, livestock and plants, with the diverse plants prompting reflection on a powerful free agent. Biqai calls human creation especially strong evidence. Ibn Ashur says the proof resumes divine uniqueness after visible cosmic creation. Kuranyolu calls heavens the great world and humans the small world, and says verses 1–18 show existence, unity, creative power and blessings after rejecting partners. Tabatabai links creation to a single Lord who governs beneficial things."}, {"id": "16:4/q13/p2", "position": "It advances the opening warning against association and denial by showing how the intended servant turns against God.", "reasons": "Qurtubi says the proof of oneness turns to human excess. Islahi says verses 1–9 warn Quraysh of approaching punishment, reject partners, affirm accountability for purposeful creation and direct people to God's path; the unnamed idolater here anticipates the challenge over God's associates at 16:27. Abu Hayyan says humans should obey rather than quarrel."}]}
{"id": "16:4/q14", "question": "How can the next verse's livestock be connected syntactically with this one?", "turns_on": "Whether al-anʿām is coordinated with al-insān under the earlier verb or starts the next sentence.", "positions": [{"id": "16:4/q14/p1", "position": "Al-anʿām can be coordinated with al-insān under khalaqa, making livestock's formation from a drop a parallel proof.", "reasons": "Ibn Ashur says khalaqahā 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
