<<chunk 173, part 4 of 0..5>>
يب): Al-Musayyib says Qarun served Pharaoh as governor over the Israelites and oppressed them. THALABI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Pharaoh appointed Qarun over the Israelites while Pharaoh was in Egypt. THALABI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Pharaoh had appointed Qarun ruler over the Israelites while they were in Egypt. THALABI (reporting المسيب بن شريك): Al-Musayyib ibn Sharik says Qarun was an official over the Israelites who oppressed them. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting يحيى بن سلام): Yahya ibn Sallam says Qarun had been Pharaoh's slave, then exceeded bounds by oppressing the Israelites. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting المسيب): Al-Musayyab says Qarun was Pharaoh’s official over the Israelites and oppressed them. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مقاتل): Muqātil identifies Qarun’s people who spoke to him as the Israelites. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): One account makes Qarun an Israelite by lineage; another says he descended from Levi son of Jacob. BAGHAWI-FULL: Qarūn was the most learned Israelite in Torah, but became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قيل): One account says Qarūn was Pharaoh’s agent over the Israelites and oppressed them. KASHSHAF-FULL: In the reported sign, Israelite leaders placed their guarded staffs in the revelation tent; Aaron’s almond staff alone sprouted green leaves, but Qārūn called it magic. IBNATIYYA-FULL: All agree Qārūn was an Israelite believer who excelled in Torah; pride later led him to transgress and disdain Moses. TABRISI (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun lorded his treasures over the Israelites; he was called al-Munawwar for his beauty and, despite being a foremost Torah reciter, hypocritically rebelled like al-Sāmirī. TABRISI (reporting سعيد بن المسيب وابن عباس): Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib and Ibn ʿAbbās say Qarun was Pharaoh’s agent over the Israelites in Egypt and oppressed them. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Qarun was from Moses' own clan. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الماوردي): Al-Mawardi transmits that Qarun served Pharaoh and oppressed the Israelites. RAZI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another explanation is that Qarun acted unjustly; Pharaoh had appointed him over the Israelites, whom he then oppressed. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi identifies the people who admonished Qarun as believing Israelites. BAYDAWI-FULL: One report says this occurred when Pharaoh put Qarun in charge of the Israelites. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya says Qārūn was an Israelite by consensus. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qārūn was called al-Munawwar for his handsome appearance, knew and recited the Torah best among the Israelites, then became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī. BIQAI-FULL: God destroyed Qarun and his companions with an unprecedented punishment, though they were Israelites and among Moses’ closest people. BIQAI-FULL: Moses selected a witness from each Israelite tribe; the account continues in the next segment. BURSEVI (reporting أهل العلم بالأخبار): Reports say Qarun's first act of rebellion was refusing God's command for Israelites to attach four sky-colored threads to their garments, intended to remind them of revelation and obedience. BURSEVI: Qarun was among those who believed in Moses and taught the Israelites the Torah, then wealth changed his state and made him hypocritical like the Samaritan. BURSEVI (reporting كشف الأسرار): Kashf al-Asrar explains that Israelites brought sacrificial offerings to Aaron, who placed them on the altar, where heavenly fire consumed them. BURSEVI: Moses had the Israelites leave their staffs overnight in the tent where revelation descended; Aaron's almond staff leafed green, but Qarun called it magic and withdrew with followers. BURSEVI: The speakers advising Qarun may be Moses and the Israelites collectively, or Moses alone offering counsel. ALUSI-FULL: Qārūn was from the Israelites; Ibn ʿAṭiyya reports consensus. ELMALILI: Qarun was an Israelite and a relative of Moses. IBNASHUR-FULL (reporting سفر العدد): Numbers 16 says Korah joined 250 Israelite leaders against Moses and Aaron over the Aaronide priesthood, was swallowed by the earth with his followers, and lost his wealth near Jericho; exegetes also say Pharaoh made him Israel’s chief in Egypt and he amassed riches. IBNASHUR-FULL: Saying Moses’ people rather than Israelites hints at Qarun’s special kinship connection to Moses. TABATABAI: The Ibn Abbas story centers on Qarun's wrongdoing against Moses, whereas the Qur'anic account says he wronged the Israelites; the verse also points to learned, acquired know-how, apparently the means of making wealth. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (reporting The Torah): The Torah says 250 Israelite community leaders joined the revolt, declaring the whole community holy and questioning Moses’ and Aaron’s authority. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: A report says Qarun had the broadest religious knowledge among the Israelites."}, {"id": "28:76/q04/p3", "position": "Qārūn was Moses' paternal uncle", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Isḥāq says Yishhar fathered both ʿImran and Qarun, making Qarun Moses’ paternal uncle and full brother of his father. THALABI (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq gives another genealogy: Yashhar fathered both Imran and Qarun; Imran's son Moses was therefore Qarun's brother's son, and Qarun his paternal uncle. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada specifies that Qarun was the son of Moses's paternal uncle and crossed the sea with the Israelites. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq instead says Moses was Qarun’s nephew and Qarun was Moses’ full uncle, since both Qarun and Imran were sons of Yashar son of Qahat. JISHUMI (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Isḥaq says Qarun was Moses’ maternal and paternal nephew. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Isḥāq instead says Qarūn was Moses’ paternal uncle, Amram’s brother, and both were sons of Yaṣhar. KASHSHAF-FULL: Another account makes Qārūn an Israelite, son of Moses’ paternal uncle, and gives his ancestry through Levi; another says Moses was his nephew. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Isḥāq says Qārūn was Moses’ paternal uncle. TABRISI (reporting محمد بن إسحاق): Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq says Moses was Qarun’s nephew and Qarun his uncle. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq says Qarun was Moses' paternal uncle. RAZI-FULL (reporting محمد بن إسحاق): Muhammad ibn Ishaq says Qarun was Moses' paternal uncle, based on their shared ancestry through Yishar and Qohath. ALUSI-FULL (reporting محمد بن إسحاق): Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq says Qārūn was Moses's paternal uncle on the lineage he describes."}, {"id": "28:76/q04/p4", "position": "Qārūn was a close relative of Moses", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Qarun’s kinship with Moses’ people did not benefit him without faith. RAZI-FULL: The verse says Qarun belonged to Moses' people, which may imply that he believed in Moses; it may instead indicate kinship. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq says Qarun was Moses’ full paternal and maternal uncle. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj identifies Qarun as Qarun son of Yashhar son of Qahith, and Moses as Moses son of Imran son of Qahith. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting محمد بن إسحاق بن يسار): Ibn Ishaq says Qarun was Moses's uncle. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): In Ibn ʿAbbas's account Moses says God commanded worship without partners, kinship, and stoning a married adulterer; the woman later recanted her paid accusation and testified Moses was innocent and God's messenger. BURSEVI: Moses tried to deal gently with Qarun because of kinship, but Qarun ignored him, harmed him, and grew more arrogant and rebellious. IBNASHUR-FULL: Qarun’s wealth and arrogance exemplify Meccan figures: Abu Lahab and Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith in kinship and abuse, al-ʿAsi ibn Waʾil in abusing Khabbab, and al-Walid ibn al-Mughira in boasting of wealth and dependents. | mentions 74:11, 74:12"}, {"id": "28:76/q04/p5", "position": "Qārūn was Moses' maternal cousin", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun was from the Israelites, in Moses’ tribe, and was his maternal cousin. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Another view makes Qārūn the son of Moses’ maternal aunt. TABRISI (reporting عطاء عن ابن عباس): ʿAṭāʾ from Ibn ʿAbbās says Qarun was an Israelite from Moses’ tribe and his maternal cousin; a report from Abū ʿAbd Allāh agrees. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting عطاء عن ابن عباس): A second view makes him the son of Moses' maternal aunt. RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun was Moses' maternal cousin. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another view makes Qarun the son of Moses’ maternal aunt. ALUSI-FULL (reporting عطاء): Majmaʿ al-Bayān transmits from ʿAṭāʾ, from Ibn ʿAbbās, that Qārūn was Moses's maternal cousin, also reported from Abū ʿAbd Allāh."}, {"id": "28:76/q04/p6", "position": "Qārūn was Moses' maternal and paternal nephew", "reasons": "JISHUMI (reporting ابن إسحاق): Ibn Isḥaq says Qarun was Moses’ maternal and paternal nephew."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q05", "question": "What was Qārūn's religious standing before his rebellion?", "turns_on": "Whether belonging to Moses' people means faith, and reports about his Torah learning and hypocrisy.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q05/p1", "position": "He was a believer and gifted Torah reader, later becoming hypocritical like al-Sāmirī", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun was Moses’ cousin, was called al-Munawwar for his beautiful Torah recitation, but hypocritically opposed Moses like al-Samiri and was destroyed by arrogance. IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qārūn was called al-Munawwar for his beautiful voice reciting the Torah. IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qārūn became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī and was destroyed for transgression; his wealth and children drove his oppression, as the next verse says. | mentions 28:78 THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun was called al-Munawwar for his handsome appearance and was the Israelites' finest reader of Torah, but hypocritical like the Samaritan. | mentions 20:85 MAWARDI-FULL (reporting قتاد
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
