<<chunk 173, part 3 of 0..5>>
l are declined as indefinite, while suitable masculine names with al, such as Ṭāwūs and Rāqūd, are declinable. KASHSHAF-FULL: Qārūn is a foreign name like Hārūn, indeclinable because it is foreign and a proper name; as a native faʿūl from q-r-n, it would decline. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Qārūn is a foreign name and therefore diptote. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says Qarun is a foreign indeclinable name; if Arabic فاعول from قرنت, it would decline. QURTUBI-FULL: Qarun is indeclinable because it is a foreign proper name. QURTUBI-FULL: Foreign masculine names on the fāʿūl pattern without a suitable definite article are indeclinable when definite but declinable when indefinite. NASAFI-FULL: Qārūn is indeclinable because it is a foreign proper name; if it were a native faʿūl form from qarana, it would decline. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qārūn is a foreign proper name and is indeclinable for foreignness and proper-name status; “from his people” may mean one who believed in Moses. BURSEVI: Qarun is a non-Arabic name like Harun, so it is indeclinable. ALUSI-FULL: Qārūn is a foreign proper name and is diptote for proper-name status and foreign origin."}, {"id": "28:76/q02/p2", "position": "If Arabic from q-r-n, Qārūn would decline", "reasons": "NAHHAS (reporting أبو إسحاق): Abū Isḥāq says Qārūn would be declinable if it were Arabic, derived from qarantu al-shayʾ. KASHSHAF-FULL: Qārūn is a foreign name like Hārūn, indeclinable because it is foreign and a proper name; as a native faʿūl from q-r-n, it would decline. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says Qarun is a foreign indeclinable name; if Arabic فاعول from قرنت, it would decline. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says Qarun would decline if derived from qarantu al-shayʾ. NASAFI-FULL: Qārūn is indeclinable because it is a foreign proper name; if it were a native faʿūl form from qarana, it would decline."}, {"id": "28:76/q02/p3", "position": "Even if Arabic on faʿūl, Qārūn would remain indeclinable", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Qarun is a foreign proper name and indeclinable; even an Arabic faʿul derivation would remain indeclinable, explaining no tanwin."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q03", "question": "Is Qārūn identified with the biblical Korah?", "turns_on": "Whether the biblical account supplies a historical identification or only a moral parallel.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q03/p1", "position": "Qārūn is identified with biblical Korah or Qorah", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: Qarun is called Qorach in the Torah. IBNASHUR-FULL: Qarun is an Arabized form of Hebrew Qorah, altered for easier pronunciation and molded on Arabic names such as Talut and Jalut; its letters are not derived from q-r-n. TABATABAI: The present Torah recounts the rebellion differently, naming Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and On with 250 leaders who oppose Moses; the cited account is Numbers chapter 16. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Qārūn is identified in the Torah as Korah, mentioned in Numbers chapter 19. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (reporting The Torah): The Torah recounts Korah son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, with Reubenites Dathan, Abiram and another associate, rising against Moses. STUDYQURAN: The Bible tells of Korah, a prominent Israelite who rebelled against Moses; the source also refers to 29:39. | mentions 29:39 Objection from ASAD-NOTES: Asad rejects the conventional identification of Qarun with biblical Korah as unwarranted; the account teaches a moral lesson rather than recounting history."}, {"id": "28:76/q03/p2", "position": "Identification with biblical Korah is unwarranted", "reasons": "ASAD-NOTES: Asad rejects the conventional identification of Qarun with biblical Korah as unwarranted; the account teaches a moral lesson rather than recounting history."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q04", "question": "What does Qārūn's being from Moses' people imply about his kinship and lineage?", "turns_on": "The genealogies and the meaning of being among Moses' people.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q04/p1", "position": "Qārūn was Moses' paternal cousin", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Qarun was an Israelite and Moses's paternal cousin, through Qohath and Levi. YAHYA-SALLAM: Qarun was Moses' paternal cousin. TAB-FULL: Al-Ṭabarī gives Qarun’s lineage through Yishhar and Qahith and identifies him as Moses’ cousin; he prefers Ibn Jurayj’s genealogy, which most scholars follow. TAB-FULL (reporting ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj identifies Qarun as a cousin of Moses, descended from Qahith, and the report corrects the transmitted name “Yisfar” to “Yishhar” and “ʿUmar” to “ʿImran.” TAB-FULL (reporting إبراهيم): Ibrāhīm reports that Qarun was Moses’ cousin. TAB-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun was Moses’ cousin, was called al-Munawwar for his beautiful Torah recitation, but hypocritically opposed Moses like al-Samiri and was destroyed by arrogance. TAB-FULL (reporting إبراهيم): Ibrāhīm reports that Qarun was Moses’ cousin and then transgressed against him. TAB-FULL (reporting إبراهيم): Ibrāhīm again identifies Qarun as Moses’ cousin. TAB-FULL (reporting مالك بن دينار): Mālik b. Dīnār says he had heard that Moses was Qarun’s cousin. ZAJJAJ (reporting التفسير): Reports call Qarun Moses' cousin and a Torah scholar; he opposed Moses and sought to discredit him. IBNABIHATIM (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says Qārūn was a cousin of Moses. IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qārūn was Moses’s paternal cousin and crossed the sea with the Children of Israel. IBNABIHATIM (reporting عبد الله بن الحارث بن نوفل وإبراهيم النخعي وسماك بن حرب): Ibn al-Ḥārith ibn Nawfal, Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, and Simāk ibn Ḥarb are also reported to say Qārūn was Moses’s cousin. THALABI (reporting أكثر المفسرين): Most commentators say Qarun was Moses's cousin: Qarun's father and Moses's father shared Fāhith, son of Levi, son of Jacob. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun was Moses's cousin. QUSHAYRI (reporting القصص): The story says Qarun was Moses' cousin and one of Israel's most devout worshippers, living apart from people in a hermitage. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting قتادة ومقاتل وإبراهيم): They call Qarun Moses’ cousin and give their lineages as Qarun son of Yashar son of Qahat and Moses son of Imran son of Qahat. JISHUMI (reporting ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj identifies Qarun as Moses’ cousin. BAGHAWI-FULL: Baghawī says Qarūn was Moses’ cousin and gives their shared lineage through Qāhith and Yaṣhar. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting ابن جريج وإبراهيم النخعي): Ibn Jurayj and Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī say he was Moses’ paternal cousin, the more famous view. TABRISI (reporting ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj instead makes Qarun Moses’ paternal cousin based on their descent from Qāhath. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting سعيد بن جبير عن ابن عباس وعبد الله بن الحارث وإبراهيم وابن جريج): One view makes Qarun Moses' cousin; it is reported by Said ibn Jubayr from Ibn Abbas and also held by Abd Allah ibn al-Harith, Ibrahim, and Ibn Jurayj. RAZI-FULL (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says Qarun was Moses' cousin, giving their shared ancestry through Yishar, Qohath, and Levi. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting النخعي وقتادة وغيرهما): Al-Nakhaʿi, Qatada, and others say Qarun was Moses’ paternal cousin; their genealogies meet at Qahith. BAYDAWI-FULL: Qarun was Moses' cousin, son of Yaṣhar b. Qāhith b. Levi, and was among those who believed in Moses. NASAFI-FULL: Qarun was an Israelite and Moses' cousin, from the line of Levi; he was called al-Munawwar for his beauty, knew the Torah better than the Israelites, but became a hypocrite like al-Samiri. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Among conflicting genealogies, the strongest is Ibn ʿAbbās's report that Qārūn was Moses's cousin, son of Yishhar, son of Qāhith. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس، إبراهيم النخعي، عبد الله بن الحارث بن نوفل، سماك بن حرب، قتادة، مالك بن دينار، ابن جريج): Ibn Abbas and the listed authorities say Qarun was Moses's cousin. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir says most scholars held that Qarun was Moses's cousin. BIQAI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas, as cited by Abu Hayyan and others, says Qarun was Moses’ cousin. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says Qarun was Moses's cousin, studied until he amassed knowledge, then envied Moses and rebelled; he rejected the alms command and plotted to have a woman falsely accuse Moses. DURR-FULL (reporting إبراهيم): Ibrahim says Qarun was Moses's cousin. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن جريج): Ibn Jurayj gives Qarun and Moses's lineage as cousins through their fathers, with alternate forms Fahith or Qahith and an Arabic form ʿImran for ʿArmum. DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun was Moses's paternal cousin, crossed the sea with Israel, was called al-Nur for his beautiful Torah recitation, then hypocritically rebelled like al-Samiri and was destroyed. BURSEVI: Qarun was Moses' cousin, believed in him, taught the Israelites the Torah, and was nicknamed the shining one for his beauty, but wealth turned him into a hypocrite like the Samaritan. ALUSI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās, Ibn Jurayj, Qatāda, and Ibrāhīm report Qārūn was Moses's cousin, with lineage traced through Qahath and Levi to Jacob. IBNASHUR-FULL: Qorah was Moses’ cousin: the source gives their Levi-family genealogies and identifies Izhar as Amram’s brother. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Korah was a Levite and Moses’ and Aaron’s cousin, jealous of their political and religious leadership and arguing that others had equal right to lead. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (reporting Tefsirlerde): Commentaries portray Qarun as Moses’s cousin and a high-ranking Pharaoh official who oppressed Israel; after first believing Moses, he opposed him from greed and envy, boasted of knowledge and wealth, and was destroyed by disbelief and arrogance."}, {"id": "28:76/q04/p2", "position": "Qārūn belonged to Israel and Moses' own people", "reasons": "THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun was called al-Munawwar for his handsome appearance and was the Israelites' finest reader of Torah, but hypocritical like the Samaritan. | mentions 20:85 THALABI (reporting المس
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
