<<chunk 173, part 5 of 0..5>>
ة): Qatada says Qarun was called al-Munawwar for his beautiful voice reciting the Torah. MAWARDI-FULL: Mawardi calls Qarun an enemy of God who feigned faith like al-Samiri. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): Another view says Qarun belonged to Moses’ people and had believed in him and accepted his religion. JISHUMI (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun was called al-Munawwar because of his handsome appearance. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): A further account says Qarun was Israel’s best Torah reader, handsomest, and richest, then became a hypocrite like the Samaritan. BAGHAWI-FULL: Qarūn was the most learned Israelite in Torah, but became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī. KASHSHAF-FULL: One explanation takes Qārūn’s being from Moses’ people to mean that he believed in Moses. KASHSHAF-FULL: Qārūn was called al-Munawwar for his beauty and was said to be Israel’s best reader of the Torah. KASHSHAF-FULL: He became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī and resented that Moses had prophethood and Aaron the altar and offering; he complained that he had no role. TABRISI (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun lorded his treasures over the Israelites; he was called al-Munawwar for his beauty and, despite being a foremost Torah reciter, hypocritically rebelled like al-Sāmirī. RAZI-FULL: Qarun was called al-Munawwar for his handsome appearance and was Israel's foremost reciter of the Torah, but he became a hypocrite like al-Samiri. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun crossed the sea with Moses, was called al-Munawwar for his handsome Torah description, but became a hypocrite like al-Samiri. NASAFI-FULL: Qarun was an Israelite and Moses' cousin, from the line of Levi; he was called al-Munawwar for his beauty, knew the Torah better than the Israelites, but became a hypocrite like al-Samiri. QASHANI: Qarun is identified as a learned man like Bal'am ibn Ba'ura. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qārūn was called al-Munawwar for his handsome appearance, knew and recited the Torah best among the Israelites, then became a hypocrite like al-Sāmirī. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting قتادة بن دعامة): Qatada says Qarun was called al-Munawwar for his beautiful Torah recitation, then became a hypocrite like al-Samiri and was destroyed by arrogance over his wealth. BIQAI-FULL: Qarun was one of the believers in Moses and belonged to the people promised divine favor after oppression. | mentions 28:5 DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun was Moses's paternal cousin, crossed the sea with Israel, was called al-Nur for his beautiful Torah recitation, then hypocritically rebelled like al-Samiri and was destroyed. BURSEVI: Qarun was Moses' cousin, believed in him, taught the Israelites the Torah, and was nicknamed the shining one for his beauty, but wealth turned him into a hypocrite like the Samaritan. ALUSI-FULL: Qārūn was called al-Munawwar for beauty and was Israel's foremost Torah memorizer and reciter, but became a hypocrite like the Samaritan. IBNATIYYA-FULL: All agree Qārūn was an Israelite believer who excelled in Torah; pride later led him to transgress and disdain Moses. BAYDAWI-FULL: Qarun was Moses' cousin, son of Yaṣhar b. Qāhith b. Levi, and was among those who believed in Moses."}, {"id": "28:76/q05/p2", "position": "He belonged to Moses' people by kinship while following another religion", "reasons": "FARRA: Report: Moses told Qarun not to exult although of Moses' people and different religion."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q06", "question": "What does fa in fabaghā suggest about Qārūn's conduct?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q06/p1", "position": "The parenthesis and fa mark the rapid passage from divine favor to insolence", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The clause is parenthetical between Qarun’s identity and the grant of treasure; fa marks immediate sequence, highlighting how quickly he grew insolent toward his kin after receiving favor."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q07", "question": "What does baghy mean in this verse?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q07/p1", "position": "Baghy is seeking wrongful superiority or going beyond one's right", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Baghy is seeking superiority without right; its root is seeking, which is why unjust rulers are called transgressors. JISHUMI: Baghy is a blameworthy legal term for rebelling against the imam; law specializes the root sense of seeking what is not rightfully sought. | mentions 49:9 TABATABAI (reporting المجمع): Al-Majmaʿ defines baghy as seeking unjust transgression or domination."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q08", "question": "Who received the treasures?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q08/p1", "position": "God bestowed the treasures on Qārūn", "reasons": "YAHYA-SALLAM: We gave him refers to Qarun and means bestowed on him."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
