<<chunk 174, part 3 of 0..5>>
ause. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الكوفيون): The Kūfans prohibit an إنّ-initial relative clause; al-Naḥḥās quotes al-Akhfash rejecting their restriction by citing this verse. IBNASHUR-FULL: Basran grammarians allow إن to begin the relative clause of ما; Kufans disallow it and instead parse ما as an indefinite noun described by the following clause, citing lack of Arabic usage. Objection from TAB-FULL: Kufan grammarians reject the Basran objection: beginning “inna” after “mā” is allowed, especially with “mā” or “man”; it is less natural with “alladhī,” which does not govern its relative clause. Objection from NAHHAS: ʿAlī ibn Sulaymān rejects the Kufans' claim that an cannot form the complement of a relative pronoun, pointing to this Qur'anic construction. Objection from QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Nahhas reports that ʿAli ibn Sulayman rejects the Kufans’ claim that inna and its governed phrase cannot form a relative clause, since the Qur’an has this construction. Objection from ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The relative mā is connected to inna and its complements; al-Naḥḥās cites al-Akhfash against the Kūfan restriction on such relative clauses."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q15", "question": "What other uses of inna and an are cited in the grammatical notes?", "turns_on": "Whether the particle is lightened, negative, conditional, oath-linked, or part of an echo form.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q15/p1", "position": "In and an have several Arabic functions, including oath, conditional, negation, and lightening", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: An with fatha has four uses: nominalizing, meaning ay, redundant, or lightened heavy an. SIBAWAYH: In can mark condition or introduce a statement in an oath; compare 86:4 and 36:32. SIBAWAYH: A Medinan heard an Arab say in Zayd la-dhahib, a lightened in; compare 37:168. SIBAWAYH: In can mean ma, as in 67:20, meaning disbelievers are only in delusion. SIBAWAYH: Ma in Zayd dhahib has an independent initial clause; Furwa ibn Maysik's poem has ma in tibna. BURHAN: The passage lists analyses of إن: one prior reading is remote, Qutrub takes it as قد, and it may be an indefinite noun with a modifier. BURHAN: Some deny a negative use of إن and reconstruct deleted ما in examples such as ما إن الكافرون إلا في غرور; a poetic line supports the omission."}, {"id": "28:76/q15/p2", "position": "Arabic echo suffixes can mark challenge, surprise, or denial", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: Echo suffix follows final vowel and consonant cluster is broken by moving the consonant. SIBAWAYH: Echo suffix marks challenge, surprise, or denial. SIBAWAYH: Echo suffix occurs once at end of entire echoed utterance. SIBAWAYH: Following vocative is outside echo and blocks suffix. SIBAWAYH: Some Arabs insert in between name and suffix to clarify faint marker. SIBAWAYH: A Bedouin said ana iniyah to deny assumption in question about lush steppe. SIBAWAYH: Speaker can echo actual words or corrected sense; suffix can be omitted. SIBAWAYH: Echo suffix is not for confirmation or guidance questions."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q16", "question": "What do Qārūn's mafātiḥ denote?", "turns_on": "The plural's possible singular and whether it denotes keys, vaults, containers, wealth, guards, or knowledge.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q16/p1", "position": "The mafātiḥ are literal keys to the treasure stores", "reasons": "YAHYA-SALLAM: Others take mafatih as keys to storehouses. MAJAZ: Mafātiḥ means keys to treasuries; strong band bears weight via inversion; poetry says haunch bears camel, lances suffer men. TAB-FULL: The “mafātiḥ” are keys, the plural of “maftaḥ,” used to open doors; another view takes them to mean storehouses. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid describes the leather keys as resembling the keys of stringed instruments. TAB-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk interprets the keys as Qarun’s containers. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو رزين): Abū Razīn glosses the keys as the storehouses; al-Suddī is also reported to give this gloss. IBNABIHATIM (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī is reported to gloss the keys as the storehouses, like Abū Razīn. IBNABIHATIM (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk glosses the keys as the containers or receptacles. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو رزين): Abū Razīn says even the contents secured by one key would suffice the people of Kufa; the verse means his treasures. NAHHAS: Mafātiḥ is the plural of maftaḥ; whoever uses miftāḥ instead has the plural mafātīḥ. THALABI (reporting أبو صالح): Some interpret the keys as guards; Abu Salih adopts this interpretation. THALABI: Mafātiḥ is the plural of miftah, the tool used to open a door. THALABI (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid defines the group carrying the keys as ten to fifteen people. THALABI (reporting المسيب بن شريك): Al-Musayyib ibn Sharik glosses the keys as Qarun's containers and reports that they numbered four hundred million, carried in forty bags. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي وأبو رزين): Al-Suddi and Abu Razin gloss the keys as Qarun's storehouses. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak glosses the keys as Qarun's containers. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr takes the keys as Qarun's comprehensive knowledge of the treasures, citing God's possession of the keys of the unseen. | mentions 6:59 WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء): Al-Farra’ prefers “treasure stores”: if the word meant keys, the normal plural would be مفاتيح, although مفاتح is permissible. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الليث): Al-Layth distinguishes the plurals: مفاتيح is the plural of the key that opens a lock, while مفاتح is the plural of a treasury. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مقاتل): Muqātil takes the heavy keys as those of Qarun’s treasuries. JISHUMI: A miftāḥ opens locks; its plurals include mafātīḥ and mafātiḥ. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قتادة ومجاهد وجماعة): Qatāda, Mujāhid, and others take mafātiḥ as the keys used to open doors. KASHSHAF-FULL: Mafātiḥ can be the plural of maftaḥ, with kasra, meaning keys; it is also explained as treasuries, whose singular is maftaḥ with fatḥa. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting الضحاك): The apparent meaning is keys; al-Ḍaḥḥāk says mafātiḥ can mean storehouses or large vessels. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The keys were likely iron and numerous due to scattered treasuries; alternatively mafātiḥ means the treasuries. TABRISI (reporting ابن عباس): Most exegetes, including Ibn ʿAbbās, take the keys as Qarun’s treasuries; al-Zajjāj prefers this view, comparing the phrase with 6:59. | mentions 6:59 TABRISI (reporting قتادة ومجاهد): Qatāda and Mujāhid instead understand the keys as implements for opening doors. TABRISI: Mafātiḥ and mafātīḥ are plural forms with the same meaning: what opens a lock. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting مجاهد وقتادة): Mujahid and Qatada say the مفاتح were keys opening the treasury doors. RAZI-FULL (reporting أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim takes mafātih to mean knowledge and comprehensive access, as in “with Him are the keys of the unseen”; Qarun's varied, abundant treasures burdened their keepers' ability to preserve and oversee them. | mentions 6:59 RAZI-FULL: Mafātih is the plural of maftaḥ, with a kasra on the mīm, meaning keys; it is also said to mean stores, whose singular would be maftaḥ with a fatḥa. RAZI-FULL (reporting بعض الناس): Critics of the literal-key view object that one person's wealth would not require so many keys, and that buried treasure would have no keys. RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس والحسن): Ibn Abbas and al-Hasan prefer taking the keys metaphorically as the wealth itself, which they consider clearer and farther from the objections; Ibn Abbas says forty strong men carried Qarun's treasuries, which numbered four hundred thousand, ten thousand per carrier. QURTUBI-FULL: Mafātih is the plural of miftah, a key; if the singular is miftāḥ its plural is mafātīḥ. QURTUBI-FULL: If mafātih means storehouses, its singular is maftaḥ with fatḥa. BAYDAWI-FULL: مفاتحه means the keys to his chests, from the singular مفتح with kasra, the tool used to open; alternatively it means his treasuries, from مفتح. NASAFI-FULL: Mafātiḥ can mean keys or treasuries, depending on the vowel of the singular maftaḥ; the author prefers the sense 'keys'. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The keys are variously glossed as treasury keys, the treasuries themselves, or their containers; al-Aʿmash reads “his keys.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan are also cited for taking the keys to mean the wealth itself. BIQAI-FULL: The keys open the locks behind the doors of the places where Qarun’s treasure was stored. BURSEVI: Mafātiḥ is the plural of maftaḥ, with kasra, meaning the keys used to open chests. ALUSI-FULL: Mafātiḥ means keys to chests, with an omitted genitive or close association; it is plural of maftaḥ, an opening instrument. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الأعمش): If mafātiḥ means treasuries, its singular is a place noun; al-Aʿmash's mafātīḥu reading supports the key interpretation. ALUSI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Al-Baḥr excludes extravagant key stories as false or nearly so; Ibn ʿAbbās is cited for treasuries carried by forty men, with a reported four hundred thousand keys, ten thousand per man. IBNASHUR-FULL: Mafātiḥ is the plural of maftaḥ, the instrument for opening, also called miftāḥ; another plural is mafātīḥ. | mentions 6:59 TABATABAI (reporting المجمع): Al-Majmaʿ says mafātiḥ and mafātīḥ are plural forms with the same meaning: tools used to unlock things. TABATABAI: Some exegetes take the keys to mean Qarun’s treasure stores, but Tabataba’i rejects that interpretation. ASAD-NOTES: Mafatih can mean keys or what is locked away; the context requires the latter sense, treasure-chests. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): The keys may signify knowledge: Korah knew so many fields that the combined skills of a group could not equal his. STUDYQURAN: The image of keys for knowledge is linked to God’s keys of the Unseen in 6:59. | mentions 6:59 STUDYQURAN (reporting commentators): The keys may be literal keys to so many treasures that one person could not carry them. RAZI-FULL: Al-Razi answers that a great volume of goods rather than co
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
