<<chunk 174, part 4 of 0..5>>
in could require many keys; the report of sixty loads is not in the Quran and should not be accepted, while numerous distinct keys would be hard for a group to track."}, {"id": "28:76/q16/p2", "position": "The mafātiḥ are storehouses, treasure chests, or the wealth stored there", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The treasures are wealth, mafatih storehouses, and ten to forty strong men could not carry the chests. YAHYA-SALLAM: Some take mafatih as storehouses or wealth. YAHYA-SALLAM: Others take mafatih as keys to storehouses. MAJAZ: Mafātiḥ means keys to treasuries; strong band bears weight via inversion; poetry says haunch bears camel, lances suffer men. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ interprets mafātiḥ as the treasure itself; Ibn Qutayba adds that the word can mean the place where treasures are stored. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: In 24:61, mafātiḥ means the stored goods someone owns; in 6:59, the phrase refers, in his view, to God's treasuries. | mentions 24:61, 6:59 TAB-FULL: The “mafātiḥ” are keys, the plural of “maftaḥ,” used to open doors; another view takes them to mean storehouses. TAB-FULL (reporting بعضهم): Some exegetes take “mafātiḥ” here to mean storehouses that weigh down the band. ZAJJAJ (reporting قيل): Another interpretation takes مفاتحه to mean his storehouses or treasuries. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو رزين): Abū Razīn glosses the keys as the storehouses; al-Suddī is also reported to give this gloss. IBNABIHATIM (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī is reported to gloss the keys as the storehouses, like Abū Razīn. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو رزين): Abū Razīn says even the contents secured by one key would suffice the people of Kufa; the verse means his treasures. THALABI (reporting أبو زرين): Abu Zarrin argues that one key would suffice for the people of Kufa, so the verse means Qarun's treasures rather than literal keys. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي وأبو رزين): Al-Suddi and Abu Razin gloss the keys as Qarun's storehouses. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr takes the keys as Qarun's comprehensive knowledge of the treasures, citing God's possession of the keys of the unseen. | mentions 6:59 WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مقاتل والضحاك وأبو صالح وأبو رزين): They understand the mafatih as Qarun’s treasure stores; the author says this is the preferred reading of al-Farra’ and al-Zajjaj. | mentions 6:59 WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء): Al-Farra’ prefers “treasure stores”: if the word meant keys, the normal plural would be مفاتيح, although مفاتح is permissible. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الليث): Al-Layth distinguishes the plurals: مفاتيح is the plural of the key that opens a lock, while مفاتح is the plural of a treasury. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مقاتل): Muqātil takes the heavy keys as those of Qarun’s treasuries. DAMGHANI: Mafātīḥ can mean treasuries; Qarun's treasure stores were heavy for a strong band to carry. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another view takes mafātiḥ as the treasuries, as in 6:59. | mentions 6:59 KASHSHAF-FULL: Mafātiḥ can be the plural of maftaḥ, with kasra, meaning keys; it is also explained as treasuries, whose singular is maftaḥ with fatḥa. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting الضحاك): The apparent meaning is keys; al-Ḍaḥḥāk says mafātiḥ can mean storehouses or large vessels. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The keys were likely iron and numerous due to scattered treasuries; alternatively mafātiḥ means the treasuries. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says the treasuries were carried on forty mules. TABRISI (reporting ابن عباس): Most exegetes, including Ibn ʿAbbās, take the keys as Qarun’s treasuries; al-Zajjāj prefers this view, comparing the phrase with 6:59. | mentions 6:59 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting السدي وأبو صالح والضحاك): Al-Suddi, Abu Salih, and al-Dahhak say مفاتح means the treasuries themselves. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers ‘treasuries of wealth’; Ibn Qutayba agrees. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting أبو صالح): Abu Salih says Qarun's treasuries were carried on forty mules. RAZI-FULL (reporting أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim takes mafātih to mean knowledge and comprehensive access, as in “with Him are the keys of the unseen”; Qarun's varied, abundant treasures burdened their keepers' ability to preserve and oversee them. | mentions 6:59 RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس والحسن): Ibn Abbas and al-Hasan prefer taking the keys metaphorically as the wealth itself, which they consider clearer and farther from the objections; Ibn Abbas says forty strong men carried Qarun's treasuries, which numbered four hundred thousand, ten thousand per carrier. QURTUBI-FULL: If mafātih means storehouses, its singular is maftaḥ with fatḥa. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Abu Salih says mafātih means the treasure stores themselves. BAYDAWI-FULL: مفاتحه means the keys to his chests, from the singular مفتح with kasra, the tool used to open; alternatively it means his treasuries, from مفتح. NASAFI-FULL: Mafātiḥ can mean keys or treasuries, depending on the vowel of the singular maftaḥ; the author prefers the sense 'keys'. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The keys are variously glossed as treasury keys, the treasuries themselves, or their containers; al-Aʿmash reads “his keys.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan are also cited for taking the keys to mean the wealth itself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that forty strong men carried Qārūn's treasuries, said here to number four hundred thousand, ten thousand per carrier. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī explains masculine agreement by construing mafātiḥ as treasuries; al-Kashf calls this weak because it loses emphasis. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الأعمش): If mafātiḥ means treasuries, its singular is a place noun; al-Aʿmash's mafātīḥu reading supports the key interpretation. ASAD-NOTES: Mafatih can mean keys or what is locked away; the context requires the latter sense, treasure-chests. Objection from TABATABAI: Some exegetes take the keys to mean Qarun’s treasure stores, but Tabataba’i rejects that interpretation."}, {"id": "28:76/q16/p3", "position": "The mafātiḥ are the containers of the treasure", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk interprets the keys as Qarun’s containers. IBNABIHATIM (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk glosses the keys as the containers or receptacles. THALABI (reporting المسيب بن شريك): Al-Musayyib ibn Sharik glosses the keys as Qarun's containers and reports that they numbered four hundred million, carried in forty bags. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak glosses the keys as Qarun's containers. QUSHAYRI: Times themselves are alike as containers; their difference comes from the acts and states that occur in them. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting الضحاك): The apparent meaning is keys; al-Ḍaḥḥāk says mafātiḥ can mean storehouses or large vessels. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says mafātih here means Qarun’s containers. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The keys are variously glossed as treasury keys, the treasuries themselves, or their containers; al-Aʿmash reads “his keys.” ALUSI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī says treasuries; al-Ḍaḥḥāk says vessels or containers, likewise reported from Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan."}, {"id": "28:76/q16/p4", "position": "The mafātiḥ signify knowledge or comprehensive access", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr takes the keys as Qarun's comprehensive knowledge of the treasures, citing God's possession of the keys of the unseen. | mentions 6:59 RAZI-FULL (reporting أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim takes mafātih to mean knowledge and comprehensive access, as in “with Him are the keys of the unseen”; Qarun's varied, abundant treasures burdened their keepers' ability to preserve and oversee them. | mentions 6:59 STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): The keys may signify knowledge: Korah knew so many fields that the combined skills of a group could not equal his. STUDYQURAN: The image of keys for knowledge is linked to God’s keys of the Unseen in 6:59. | mentions 6:59 Objection from ALUSI-FULL: Abū Muslim takes keys as knowledge, like the keys of the unseen in 6:59; al-Ālūsī calls this far-fetched. | mentions 6:59"}, {"id": "28:76/q16/p5", "position": "The mafātiḥ are guards", "reasons": "THALABI (reporting أبو صالح): Some interpret the keys as guards; Abu Salih adopts this interpretation."}, {"id": "28:76/q16/p6", "position": "The keys were carried together with the treasures", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN (reporting commentators): Another interpretation is that the keys were carried together with the treasures."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q17", "question": "How is mafātiḥahu also read?", "turns_on": "The reported mafātīḥ and singular readings and their grammatical effects.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q17/p1", "position": "A singular 'key' reading is reported", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting بديل بن ميسرة): Budayl reads linūʾu with yāʾ; Abū al-Fatḥ explains the plural subject, while al-Dānī reports singular miftāḥuhu, making that explanation unnecessary. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting بديل بن ميسرة): Budayl reads the verb in masculine singular, explained by an omitted masculine noun such as the load of the keys; al-Zamakhsharī offers a related attachment explanation. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الأعمش): If mafātiḥ means treasuries, its singular is a place noun; al-Aʿmash's mafātīḥu reading supports the key interpretation. ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو عمرو الداني): Abū ʿAmr al-Dānī says Budayl read mafātiḥ in the singular, so masculine agreement needs no reinterpretation."}, {"id": "28:76/q17/p2", "position": "Al-Aʿmash's mafātīḥ reading expands the plural", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (reporting دليل بن ميسرة): Dalīl ibn Muyassara reads the verb with yāʾ, construing mafātiḥ as treasuries and giving it agreement with what it is attached to. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash reads mafātīḥ with yāʾ. ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو حيان): Abū Ḥayyān supplies an omitted masculine noun such as load or amount of the keys; Ibn Jinnī treats that amount as one unit and cites rajaz."}]}
{"id":
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
