<<chunk 174, part 5 of 0..5>>
 "28:76/q18", "question": "What did reports say about the keys' material, size, and transport?", "turns_on": "Reports differ in hide type, number and kind of animals, size, and credibility.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q18/p1", "position": "Sixty mules carried small leather keys", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khathīma reports that Qarun’s leather keys, each finger-sized and for a separate treasure, were carried on sixty mules. TAB-FULL (reporting منصور): Manṣūr reports that the Gospel described Qarun’s keys as weighing sixty white, marked mules, with each finger-sized key opening a separate treasure. TAB-FULL (reporting خيثمة): A further report gives sixty as the band’s number and says the keys were transported on sixty mules. ZAJJAJ (reporting رواية): A report describes Qarun's keys as finger-sized leather pieces carried by seventy or sixty mules. THALABI (reporting خيثمة): Khaythama says he found in the Gospel that Qarun's keys loaded sixty marked white mules, each key no larger than a finger and each corresponding to a treasure. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting خيثمة): Al-Aʿmash transmits from Khaythama that sixty fine dappled mules carried the keys when Qarun rode. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaythama says he found in the Gospel that Qarūn’s treasury keys loaded sixty mules, each key no longer than a finger and each opening a treasure. KASHSHAF-FULL: A report says sixty mules carried the treasury keys, one per treasury, each no larger than a finger and made of leather. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الأعمش عن خيثمة): Al-A'mash reports from Khaythama that Qarun's leather keys, each finger-sized, loaded sixty mules. NASAFI-FULL: The keys were carried by sixty mules, one key per treasury; each key was no larger than a finger and made of leather. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting الأعمش عن خيثمة): Khaythama says the keys were leather, each finger-sized and assigned to a separate storehouse; sixty marked gray mules carried them when Qarun rode. ALUSI-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaythamah reports sixty decorated mules carrying keys, one key per treasure; another version gives seventy mules and leather keys, one per storehouse."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p2", "position": "Forty mules carried the keys", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ takes the “keys” to mean storehouses, which he says were carried on forty mules. ZAJJAJ: The likelier reading is keys meaning treasuries of wealth carried on seventy or forty mules; tiny leather keys could not be so burdensome. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says Qārūn’s storehouse was carried on forty mules. IBNABIHATIM (reporting ابن عباس وأبو صالح وقتادة والضحاك): Ibn ʿAbbās, Abū Ṣāliḥ, Qatāda, and al-Ḍaḥḥāk are also reported to say Qārūn’s storehouse was carried on forty mules. THALABI (reporting يقال): One account says Qarun carried keys everywhere: first iron, then wood when iron was too heavy, then finger-length cowhide keys; forty mules carried them when he rode. MAWARDI-FULL: Another view takes them as the keys to his storehouses, made of hides and carried by forty mules. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says the keys were carried on forty mules; another report says seventy. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting ويقال): One account says Qarūn carried the keys everywhere; after iron became too heavy, he tried wood, then cowhide, and the keys went with him on forty mules. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak gives the number of mules carrying the keys as forty. DURR-FULL (reporting أبو صالح مولى أم هانىء): Abu Salih adds that Qarun's treasury was carried on forty mules."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p3", "position": "The keys were made of camel hide", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun’s keys were made of camel hides. ABDURRAZZAQ (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid also reports that the keys were made of camel hides. ABDURRAZZAQ (reporting ابن سيرين): Ibn Sīrīn relates that ʿUmar considered making dirhams from camel hides, but abandoned the idea when told it would exhaust the camels. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says the keys were made of camel hide. IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says the keys were made of camel hide. THALABI (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the keys were made from camel hides. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting قتادة ومجاهد وخيثمة): They take the word as keys used to open doors, and say Qarun’s keys were made of camel hides. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaythama says the Gospel describes Qārūn’s keys as camel-hide, half a handspan long, each weighing a camel or mule load. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the keys were made of camel hide. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says Qarun's treasure keys were made from camel hides."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p4", "position": "Seventy mules carried the keys", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (reporting رواية): A report describes Qarun's keys as finger-sized leather pieces carried by seventy or sixty mules. ZAJJAJ: The likelier reading is keys meaning treasuries of wealth carried on seventy or forty mules; tiny leather keys could not be so burdensome. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says the keys were carried on forty mules; another report says seventy. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting القشيري): Al-Qushayri says seventy mules carried Qarun’s keys when he rode. ALUSI-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaythamah reports sixty decorated mules carrying keys, one key per treasure; another version gives seventy mules and leather keys, one per storehouse."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p5", "position": "Sixty camels carried the keys", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting خيثمة): Khaythama says the leather keys were finger-sized, each opened a separate storehouse, and sixty gray, white-footed camels carried them when Qārūn rode. RAZI-FULL (reporting قائلون): One interpretation takes the keys literally: each storehouse had a finger-sized key made of camel hide, and sixty camels carried the keys when Qarun rode. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaithama says the Gospel described Qarun’s keys on sixty richly marked white camels; each key was finger-sized and opened a treasure sufficient for Basra. DURR-FULL (reporting خيثمة): Khaythama says he found in the Gospel that Qarun's keys were carried by sixty fine camels, each key no larger than a finger."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p6", "position": "The keys were successively made of iron, wood, then hide", "reasons": "THALABI (reporting يقال): One account says Qarun carried keys everywhere: first iron, then wood when iron was too heavy, then finger-length cowhide keys; forty mules carried them when he rode. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting ويقال): One account says Qarūn carried the keys everywhere; after iron became too heavy, he tried wood, then cowhide, and the keys went with him on forty mules. BURSEVI (reporting بعضهم): A report said to be found in the Gospel describes Qarun's keys as finger-sized, each opening a treasure; another account says he carried them everywhere and changed the material from iron to wood to cowhide as they grew too heavy."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p7", "position": "The extravagant key reports are doubted", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: The likelier reading is keys meaning treasuries of wealth carried on seventy or forty mules; tiny leather keys could not be so burdensome. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The author rejects similar reports as weak and implausible: identifying keys is unclear and their number could be counted easily. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Reports of the number of keys were so extravagant that the author omits them as lies or near-lies."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p8", "position": "The keys were made of cowhide", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another report says the keys were made of cowhide to make them lighter. BURSEVI (reporting بعضهم): A report said to be found in the Gospel describes Qarun's keys as finger-sized, each opening a treasure; another account says he carried them everywhere and changed the material from iron to wood to cowhide as they grew too heavy."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p9", "position": "Forty camels carried the keys", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting خيثمة): A second report from Khaythama says leather keys were carried by forty gray, white-footed camels."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p10", "position": "Each key was small, roughly finger sized", "reasons": "TABRISI (reporting الأعمش عن خيثمة): Al-Aʿmash transmits from Khaythama that Qarun’s leather keys were each as large as a finger."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p11", "position": "Seventy camels carried the keys", "reasons": "DURR-FULL (reporting خيثمة): In another report Khaythama says the keys were made of hide, each opened a separate storehouse, and seventy camels carried them when Qarun rode."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p12", "position": "The keys were likely numerous iron keys", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: The keys were likely iron and numerous due to scattered treasuries; alternatively mafātiḥ means the treasuries."}, {"id": "28:76/q18/p13", "position": "The keys were huge iron door latches", "reasons": "ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The keys are literal heavy latches: treasures were buried behind huge iron doors bolted with rods, requiring strong men to lift or fasten them."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
