<<chunk 174, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "28:76/q09", "question": "How did Qārūn transgress against his people?", "turns_on": "Whether the offence was tyranny, wealth driven pride, disbelief, disobedience, or a specific act.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q09/p1", "position": "He used wealth and status to act arrogantly and oppress his people", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Qarun oppressed Israel because of his treasure. YAHYA-SALLAM: Qarun oppressed Israelites as Pharaoh's official. TAB-FULL: Qarun exceeded proper bounds against his people through pride and tyranny. TAB-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarun transgressed through the abundance of his wealth. IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda links Qārūn’s hypocrisy and destruction to his transgression, caused by his abundant wealth and children; he cites the following verse. | mentions 28:78 IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda glosses his transgression as acting superior over his people. THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada explains Qarun's aggression as stemming from his great wealth and many children. THALABI (reporting سفيان): Sufyan, transmitting from Qatada, says Qarun oppressed people through arrogance and ostentation. THALABI (reporting قيل): Other explanations say Qarun's transgression was arrogance or his great wealth. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr says Qarun's transgression was attributing God's treasure to his own knowledge and contrivance. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun's transgression was his superiority over them through abundant wealth and children. QUSHAYRI: Love of the world drives hoarding, hoarding strengthens love, and love leads to transgression against others; abundant wealth became the cause of Qarun's destruction. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting قتادة ومقاتل): Qatada and Muqatil say Qarun transgressed through his abundant wealth and children, becoming arrogant and extravagant. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun exceeded others by a handspan in his clothing; al-Wahidi treats this as a sign of arrogance and self-exaltation. JISHUMI (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun flaunted his many treasures, which Jishumi equates with Abu ʿAli’s explanation. JISHUMI (reporting سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib says Qarun was Pharaoh’s official over Israel and oppressed them. JISHUMI: Vast lawful wealth could come from pre-Islamic treasures, inheritance, trade or farming by a large household, earnings, or spoils; Pharaoh’s appointment of Qarun over Israel may have enabled business, and sources could combine. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says Qarūn transgressed against them through his wealth. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Ibn ʿUmar quotes the Prophet saying that God will not look on Resurrection Day at one who drags his garment out of pride. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another explanation says Qarūn transgressed through pride and arrogance. KASHSHAF-FULL: Baghy means injustice; one report says Pharaoh appointed Qārūn over Israel and he oppressed them, while other reports call it pride and ostentation over wealth and children, or lengthening clothes by a span. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting قتادة): Qatada says his transgression was arrogance. RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains that Qarun acted tyrannically and arrogantly toward his people and angered them. RAZI-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun's transgression was to wear clothes a span longer than his people's, an act of arrogance. RAZI-FULL: One explanation is that Qarun's wealth made him despise the poor, disregard their right as fellow believers, and fail to honor them. RAZI-FULL (reporting القفال): Al-Qaffal explains that Qarun sought superiority over his people and wanted them subjected to him. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid also interprets lā tafraḥ as “do not transgress,” and al-fariḥīn as aggressors. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun wronged his people by despising them because of his abundant wealth and children. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr says Qarun’s transgression was attributing God-given treasures to his own knowledge and ingenuity. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A prophetic report warns that God will not look at one who trails his garment out of arrogance. BAYDAWI-FULL: His transgression meant seeking superiority over his people and wanting them under his command, behaving arrogantly, or oppressing them. NASAFI-FULL: Baghā means that Qarun transgressed and oppressed his people. NASAFI-FULL: Reported explanations say Pharaoh appointed Qarun over Israel and he oppressed them; alternatively, his wealth and children made him arrogant, or he wore clothes a handspan longer than theirs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Another reported sign of his arrogance was adding a handspan to his clothes. BIQAI-FULL: Moses witnessed Qarun’s rejection and accusation of magic but did not pray against him, since arrogance removed him from the promise to aid the oppressed. BIQAI-FULL: Qarun transgresses by despising his people because of wealth, cutting his bonds with them and joining Pharaoh’s party; this moves him from favor and trust into ruin and betrayal. BIQAI-FULL: The preposition ʿalā signals overbearing and marks Qarun’s willful departure from proper conduct. DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada says Qarun transgressed because of his great wealth and children. DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada glosses bagha as rising over or lording it over them. BURSEVI (reporting الراغب): Al-Raghib defines baghy as seeking to go beyond moderation, whether or not one succeeds, and associates it with arrogance and overstepping one's station. BURSEVI: Qarun sought superiority over his people and wanted them under his command; wealth's abundance led to arrogance, pride, conceit, rebellion, and rejection of advice. BURSEVI: A hadith warns that God will not look on Judgment Day at someone who drags his robe out of pride. ALUSI-FULL: Baghy means seeking superiority and control, arrogance, or oppression and demanding what was not one's right. IBNASHUR-FULL: Baghy is aggression; aggression against a community means slighting its rights, beginning with violation of its law. Oppressing one’s kin is especially painful, as Tarafa’s verse says. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Qārūn’s tyranny in the Qur’an refers to his rebellion against Moses. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The treasure and its keys indicate affluence, which fueled Qārūn’s rebellion and arrogance because he resented Moses’ and Aaron’s leadership. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Qarun’s story remains a warning to those who trust wealth and power, consider themselves privileged and great, disobey God, wrong others, and transgress. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): Another gloss is Korah’s contempt for others, arising from his great wealth. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): Transgression may also refer to failing to give required charity, flaunting his wealth, or mistreating people."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p2", "position": "He lengthened or dragged his clothing as a display of pride", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): One explanation is that Qarun’s transgression was adding a handspan to the length of his clothes. IBNABIHATIM (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Ḥawshab says Qārūn transgressed by lengthening his garment by a span. THALABI (reporting عطاء الخراساني وشهر بن حوشب): ʿAta al-Khurasani and Shahr ibn Hawshab say Qarun extended his garments by a handspan beyond others. THALABI (reporting قيل): One view says Qarun transgressed by adding a handspan to the people's clothing. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun's transgression was lengthening his garment by a span. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun exceeded others by a handspan in his clothing; al-Wahidi treats this as a sign of arrogance and self-exaltation. JISHUMI (reporting عطاء الخراساني): ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurasani says Qarun lengthened his garments by a handspan. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Ḥawshab says Qarūn transgressed by lengthening his garment by a handspan. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Ibn ʿUmar quotes the Prophet saying that God will not look on Resurrection Day at one who drags his garment out of pride. KASHSHAF-FULL: Baghy means injustice; one report says Pharaoh appointed Qārūn over Israel and he oppressed them, while other reports call it pride and ostentation over wealth and children, or lengthening clothes by a span. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Ḥawshab says Qārūn lengthened his clothes by a handspan beyond others. TABRISI (reporting عطاء الخراساني وشهر بن حوشب): ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurāsānī and Shahr ibn Ḥawshab say Qarun added a span to his clothes. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting عطاء الخراساني وشهر بن حوشب): Ata al-Khurasani and Shahr ibn Hawshab say he lengthened his clothes by a span. RAZI-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun's transgression was to wear clothes a span longer than his people's, an act of arrogance. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr ibn Hawshab says Qarun’s transgression was letting his garment trail an extra span. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A prophetic report warns that God will not look at one who trails his garment out of arrogance. NASAFI-FULL: Reported explanations say Pharaoh appointed Qarun over Israel and he oppressed them; alternatively, his wealth and children made him arrogant, or he wore clothes a handspan longer than theirs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Another reported sign of his arrogance was adding a handspan to his clothes. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr says Qarun lengthened his clothes by a span to elevate himself above his people. DURR-FULL (reporting شهر بن حوشب): Shahr b. Hawshab says Qarun's transgression was adding a span to the length of his clothes. ALUSI-FULL: One report says he lengthened clothes by a span; another says Pharaoh appointe
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
