<<chunk 174, part 1 of 0..5>>
d him over Israel."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p3", "position": "His transgression was unbelief or hypocrisy", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk interprets Qārūn’s transgression as unbelief in God. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says Qarun's transgression was disbelief in God. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): Other views identify Qarun’s transgression as unbelief and hypocrisy, or pursuing entertainment and corruption. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says Qarūn transgressed through associating partners with God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says Qarun transgressed by disbelief in God. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak identifies Qarun’s transgression as disbelief in God. BURSEVI (reporting الراغب): Al-Raghib defines baghy as seeking to go beyond moderation, whether or not one succeeds, and associates it with arrogance and overstepping one's station. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): Transgression may mean Korah’s disbelief in God."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p4", "position": "He rebelled against Moses and his people", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: “When his people said to him” attaches to “he transgressed.” TABRISI: Baghy is unjustly seeking rebellion; unjust rulers are consequently called bughāt. RAZI-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says Qarun transgressed, overpowered his people, and did not deal fairly with them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya links id to Qārūn's transgression, while al-Ḥawfī and Abū al-Baqāʾ propose other links; the author finds these timing connections weak. BIQAI-FULL: The next phrase identifies the time when Qarun’s people spoke and introduces the cause of his transgression. BURSEVI: God explains that a small command is not insignificant: those who disobey a small command will not obey a great one. BURSEVI: Qarun refused the threads, saying masters use such things to distinguish themselves from servants; this began his transgression. BURSEVI: A report urges people to show kindness to the poor before their own fortunes change, since the poor will have great standing in the afterlife and may lead their benefactors to Paradise."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p5", "position": "As Pharaoh's officer over Israel, he oppressed them", "reasons": "YAHYA-SALLAM: Qarun oppressed Israelites as Pharaoh's official. JISHUMI (reporting سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib says Qarun was Pharaoh’s official over Israel and oppressed them. JISHUMI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says Qarun was king over Israel while they were in Egypt. JISHUMI: Vast lawful wealth could come from pre-Islamic treasures, inheritance, trade or farming by a large household, earnings, or spoils; Pharaoh’s appointment of Qarun over Israel may have enabled business, and sources could combine. KASHSHAF-FULL: Baghy means injustice; one report says Pharaoh appointed Qārūn over Israel and he oppressed them, while other reports call it pride and ostentation over wealth and children, or lengthening clothes by a span. NASAFI-FULL: Reported explanations say Pharaoh appointed Qarun over Israel and he oppressed them; alternatively, his wealth and children made him arrogant, or he wore clothes a handspan longer than theirs. ALUSI-FULL: One report says he lengthened clothes by a span; another says Pharaoh appointed him over Israel."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p6", "position": "He attributed God-given wealth to his own knowledge", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr says Qarun's transgression was attributing God's treasure to his own knowledge and contrivance. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr says Qarun’s transgression was attributing God-given treasures to his own knowledge and ingenuity."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p7", "position": "He refused the due charity or its assessment", "reasons": "JISHUMI (reporting قيل): Another account says Qarun refused Moses’ zakat assessment after the amount became enormous. ELMALILI: Elmalılı explains Qarun's transgression as hoarding, withholding zakat, and rebelling against Moses."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p8", "position": "Envy of Moses' and Aaron's offices drove his rebellion", "reasons": "ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The treasure and its keys indicate affluence, which fueled Qārūn’s rebellion and arrogance because he resented Moses’ and Aaron’s leadership. STUDYQURAN (reporting some): Some attribute Korah’s attitude and actions partly to jealousy of Moses and Aaron and the station God gave them."}, {"id": "28:76/q09/p9", "position": "He pursued entertainment and corruption", "reasons": "JISHUMI (reporting قيل): Other views identify Qarun’s transgression as unbelief and hypocrisy, or pursuing entertainment and corruption."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q10", "question": "What dispute with Moses and Aaron is reported behind Qārūn's rebellion?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q10/p1", "position": "Qārūn resented Aaron's priesthood, rejected the sign of his budding staff, and rebelled", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء والكلبي): They say Qarun resented that Moses had prophethood and Aaron held the altar and offerings, while he had no such distinction. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): One view says Moses removed Qarun from overseeing offerings and gave the role to his brother, provoking Qarun’s rebellion. KASHSHAF-FULL: A report says that after the sea crossing, Moses assigned Aaron the religious leadership and priestly offering, which made Qārūn resent and envy them. KASHSHAF-FULL: Qārūn challenged Moses to show a sign, and Moses said the arrangement was God’s doing. RAZI-FULL (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says Qarun envied Aaron's high-priestly office: Moses had prophecy and Aaron the priesthood, altar, and offerings, while Qarun felt he had no position. RAZI-FULL (reporting الكلبي): In al-Kalbi's account, Moses tested the leaders' rods by God's command; Aaron's almond-wood rod sprouted green leaves overnight, but Qarun called the sign magic and withdrew with many followers. RAZI-FULL (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbi's story continues that Aaron received the priesthood, altar, and offerings; Israelites brought him gifts, which a heavenly fire consumed, while wealthy Qarun separated with many Israelite followers. QURTUBI-FULL: A reported story says Qarun resented Moses’ leadership and Aaron’s priestly role, demanded a sign, then dismissed Aaron’s staff sprouting leaves as magic. BAYDAWI-FULL: A report says Qarun envied Moses and Aaron, complaining that Moses had prophecy and Aaron priesthood while he had nothing; Moses replied that this was God's arrangement. BIQAI-FULL: Moses’ tribal witnesses were told to bring proof about the priesthood; Aaron’s staff blossomed while theirs did not, showing that God decides priesthood and all affairs. BURSEVI: After the sea crossing, the priestly office of the altar was given to Aaron, setting up Qarun's later jealousy. BURSEVI: Qarun envied Aaron's priesthood and complained that Moses had prophecy, Aaron priesthood, and he himself had no office despite teaching Torah. BURSEVI: Moses replied that God, not Moses, had bestowed Aaron's office; Qarun demanded proof and dismissed the miracle of Aaron's budding staff as magic. ALUSI-FULL: A report says Qārūn resented Moses's prophethood and Aaron's priestly role after the sea crossing, since sacrifice went to Aaron; he asked why he had no similar standing. ALUSI-FULL: Moses says the arrangement was God's doing; Qārūn demands a sign, but dismisses Aaron's sprouting staff as magic. ALUSI-FULL: Qārūn envied Moses and Aaron and wanted their blessings removed; the fa may explain his wrongdoing or mark consequence, since kinship can prompt oppression. IBNASHUR-FULL: The Qur’anic account explains Qarun’s envy: Moses’ mission and departure with Israel removed Qarun from power over his people, so he resented Moses. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Korah challenged Moses’ and Aaron’s superiority and conspired with members of the family to rebel against Moses."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q11", "question": "What happened in the reported plot against Moses?", "turns_on": "The woman's accusation, confession, payment, and Moses' response vary in the reports.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q11/p1", "position": "Qārūn bribed a woman to accuse Moses; she exposed the plot and vindicated him", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (reporting التفسير): Qarun, then richest man, hired a notorious woman to falsely accuse Moses of soliciting her, promising marriage and payment. ZAJJAJ (reporting التفسير): The woman repented and exposed Qarun; he was stunned, and God gave Moses authority over him and ordered earth to obey him. IBNABIHATIM (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās relates that people tried to frame Moses for adultery by bribing a woman to accuse him; she instead testified to his innocence and prophethood. God then told Moses that the earth would obey him, so he could command it. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas relates that, after Moses ordered an adulterer stoned, Qarun paid a prostitute to falsely accuse Moses of adultery; she then confessed Qarun's scheme and affirmed Moses's innocence. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi names the prostitute Shajarta and says Qarun promised her two thousand dirhams. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): One story says Qarun paid a notorious prostitute to accuse Moses of soliciting her; God restrained her tongue and she exonerated him. JISHUMI (reporting بعضهم): Another version says she repented and publicly confessed Qarun paid her to accuse Moses, who was innocent. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports Qārūn hired a beautiful courtesan to accuse Moses publicly; she repented, exposed him, and God cleared Moses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun paid a woman to accuse Moses; when Moses made her swear, she disclosed the plot. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi says the prostitute was named Sabarta and Qarun paid her two thousand dirhams. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): A report from Ibn Abbas says Qarun paid a prostitute to accuse Moses of adult
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
