<<chunk 174, part 2 of 0..5>>
ery; she confessed that Qarun had bribed her and Moses was innocent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: His transgressions included unbelief, arrogance, envy of Moses's prophethood and Aaron's sacrificial role, oppression under Pharaoh, and arranging a woman's false accusation against Moses. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says Qarun was Moses's cousin, studied until he amassed knowledge, then envied Moses and rebelled; he rejected the alms command and plotted to have a woman falsely accuse Moses. Names for the woman vary between Shajarta and Sabarta."}, {"id": "28:76/q11/p2", "position": "The woman first accused Moses, then recanted", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Another account says the woman first accused Moses, then confessed Qārūn had prompted her."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q12", "question": "What are the treasures (kunūz) given to Qārūn?", "turns_on": "Lexical stored wealth, hidden wealth, and the legal use for wealth without zakāt.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q12/p1", "position": "Kunūz denotes accumulated or stored wealth", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The treasures are wealth, mafatih storehouses, and ten to forty strong men could not carry the chests. YAHYA-SALLAM: Treasures mean wealth. DAMGHANI: Kunūz means money and wealth, as in the accounts of Pharaoh’s people, hoarders of gold and silver, and Qārūn. JISHUMI: Kanz originally means gathering; in custom it is wealth hidden underground, and in law it is wealth whose zakat has not been paid. JISHUMI: The legal meaning of kanz as wealth not tithed is established by the law. JISHUMI: The verse indicates that Qarun had great wealth. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Qārūn’s wealth was called treasures because he withheld zakāt, beginning his hostility toward Moses. TABRISI: Kanz is accumulated wealth, conventionally hidden underground; legally only wealth on which zakāt is unpaid is called a treasure, given the warning about it. RAZI-FULL: Although “treasures” conventionally means wealth stored underground, it can also denote collected wealth kept in places secured by locks. BAYDAWI-FULL: The treasures were stored wealth. BIQAI-FULL: Kunūz are buried and stored wealth, in addition to visible property ready to spend on needs. BURSEVI (reporting الراغب): Al-Raghib defines kanz as collecting wealth in heaps and storing it, from the expression for heaping dates in a container. BURSEVI: Rikaz is wealth embedded in earth, whether naturally formed or placed there; a mineral deposit is naturally formed, while a treasure is placed there. ALUSI-FULL: The treasures are stored wealth, metaphorically treated as buried treasure if kanz is restricted to buried wealth. ALUSI-FULL: One view says the wealth was called treasure because Qārūn paid no zakāt despite Moses ordering him to, causing their enmity. ELMALILI: Qarun, like Pharaoh for political despotism, epitomizes financial despotism and hoarding; his story depicts a monopolist capitalist. IBNASHUR-FULL: Quraysh’s wealthy leaders resisted Muhammad and disparaged poor followers, claiming revelation should come to a wealthy notable; the Qur’an repeatedly rebukes this status-by-wealth assumption. | mentions 43:31, 34:35, 73:11 IBNASHUR-FULL: Treasures are stored money kept in a box or vault; a store could hold a standard sum, with a key for each container. | mentions 11:12 ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The fate of a wealthy Jewish capitalist shows that God grants favors, though the wretched attribute them to their own ability and idols. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Abū Lahab occupies Qārūn’s role in Muḥammad’s community: his wealth made a trial for himself and others, and the example is meant to open such people’s eyes."}, {"id": "28:76/q12/p2", "position": "In legal usage, kanz is wealth on which zakāt is unpaid", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Kanz originally means gathering; in custom it is wealth hidden underground, and in law it is wealth whose zakat has not been paid. JISHUMI: The legal meaning of kanz as wealth not tithed is established by the law. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Qārūn’s wealth was called treasures because he withheld zakāt, beginning his hostility toward Moses. TABRISI: Kanz is accumulated wealth, conventionally hidden underground; legally only wealth on which zakāt is unpaid is called a treasure, given the warning about it. ALUSI-FULL: One view says the wealth was called treasure because Qārūn paid no zakāt despite Moses ordering him to, causing their enmity."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q13", "question": "How did Qārūn acquire his wealth, according to the notes?", "turns_on": "Joseph's hoards, alchemy, Egypt, lawful earning, and the objection about illicit wealth.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q13/p1", "position": "He found or received one of Joseph's hoards", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ says Qārūn found one of Joseph’s hidden treasures. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting عطاء): Ata says Qarun found one of Joseph's treasures. TABRISI (reporting عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ says Qarun found one of Joseph’s hidden treasures. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting عطاء): ʿAtaʾ says Qarun obtained many of Joseph’s treasures. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: One view says God gave him a treasure of Joseph; another says his wealth was called treasure because he withheld its zakāt, beginning his hostility toward Moses. DURR-FULL (reporting عطاء): ʿAta says Qarun found one of Joseph's hoards. DURR-FULL (reporting الوليد بن زوران): Al-Walid b. Zawran also says Qarun found one of Joseph's hoards. ALUSI-FULL (reporting عطاء): A report from ʿAṭāʾ says God gave Qārūn a buried treasure from Joseph's hoards."}, {"id": "28:76/q13/p2", "position": "He obtained wealth through alchemy", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting الوليد بن زروان): Al-Walīd ibn Zarwān says Qārūn practiced alchemy. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الوليد): Al-Walid says Qarun practiced alchemy. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الوليد بن مروان): Al-Walid ibn Marwan says Qarun practiced alchemy. DURR-FULL (reporting الوليد بن زوران): Al-Walid b. Zawran alternatively says Qarun knew alchemy."}, {"id": "28:76/q13/p3", "position": "His wealth could have come from lawful inheritance, trade, farming, or earlier treasure", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Jishumi infers that Qarun’s wealth was lawful because God says He gave it to him. RAZI-FULL (reporting الكعبي): Al-Kaʿbi objects that if God does not give illicit wealth, the phrase “We gave him” conflicts with that principle; al-Razi replies that the text does not establish Qarun's wealth was illicit, and it could have come from previous kings' treasure, inheritance, or trade."}, {"id": "28:76/q13/p4", "position": "He amassed wealth in Egypt under Pharaoh", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Qarun accumulated his wealth in Egypt and went out with it."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q14", "question": "How does mā inna mafātiḥahu work grammatically?", "turns_on": "Whether inna can begin the relative clause of mā or mā must be an indefinite noun with a descriptive clause.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q14/p1", "position": "Mā is relative, with the inna clause as its complement and object of ātaynāhu", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: The inna clause is the relative clause of ma; an oath can be understood, as in ma wallahi inna. TAB-FULL (reporting بعض أهل البصرة): A Basran notes that beginning “inna” after “mā” is unusual, though 62:8 offers a parallel construction. | mentions 62:8 TAB-FULL (reporting أهل الكوفة): Kufan grammarians reject the Basran objection: beginning “inna” after “mā” is allowed, especially with “mā” or “man”; it is less natural with “alladhī,” which does not govern its relative clause. NAHHAS: An with its subject forms the relative complement of mā. NAHHAS (reporting علي بن سليمان): ʿAlī ibn Sulaymān rejects the Kufans' claim that an cannot form the complement of a relative pronoun, pointing to this Qur'anic construction. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الأخفش): Al-Akhfash reads ما as “that which”: the إن clause belongs to the relative construction, so one pauses after ما despite إن usually beginning a clause. QURTUBI-FULL: The particle inna and its subject and predicate are within the relative clause of mā; mā is the object of ataynā. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting النحاس): Al-Nahhas reports that ʿAli ibn Sulayman rejects the Kufans’ claim that inna and its governed phrase cannot form a relative clause, since the Qur’an has this construction. NASAFI-FULL: Mā is a relative pronoun in the accusative as the object of ātaynāhu; the following inna clause is its relative clause, explaining the kasra on inna. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The relative mā is connected to inna and its complements; al-Naḥḥās cites al-Akhfash against the Kūfan restriction on such relative clauses. SAMIN-DURR: Mā is a relative pronoun meaning “that which”; its relative clause includes in and what follows, explaining the kasra on in. SAMIN-DURR (reporting الأخفش الصغير): Al-Akhfash the Younger transmits that the Kufans prohibit a relative clause from beginning with in and consider it objectionable, despite its Qurʾānic occurrence. BURSEVI: The relative clause about the keys is the second object of āteynāhu. ALUSI-FULL: ما is relative and the second object of آتينا; mafātiḥ is the noun of إنّ, and its clause is both predicate and relative clause. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الكوفيون): The Kūfans prohibit an إنّ-initial relative clause; al-Naḥḥās quotes al-Akhfash rejecting their restriction by citing this verse. IBNASHUR-FULL: Basran grammarians allow إن to begin the relative clause of ما; Kufans disallow it and instead parse ما as an indefinite noun described by the following clause, citing lack of Arabic usage."}, {"id": "28:76/q14/p2", "position": "Kufans instead parse mā as an indefinite noun described by the inna clause", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (reporting الأخفش الصغير): Al-Akhfash the Younger transmits that the Kufans prohibit a relative clause from beginning with in and consider it objectionable, despite its Qurʾānic occurrence. ALUSI-FULL: If the objection is lack of precedent, the verse is not unambiguous because ما may be an indefinite noun with an adjectival clause; if it is syntactic linkage, the verse rebuts it for either cl
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
