<<chunk 175, part 1 of 0..5>>
ommentators): Alternatively, the burden may be the knowledge required to manage so many different keys, which were difficult to count or track. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Mafātiḥ burden the group by their weight; nāʾa means to lean under a burden, while anāʾa means to make someone lean. IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: The keys weighed down a band means their weight made the band bend under them. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says even a group of strong men could not lift the keys. ITQAN: لتنوء بالعصبة means to weigh heavily; a line by Imruʾ al-Qays supports the sense. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās glosses latanūʾu bi-l-ʿuṣba as weighing heavily and cites Imruʾ al-Qays's line about a woman walking under the weight of her hips. THALABI: The keys weighed down their carriers because of their heaviness; nāʾa yanūʾu describes rising under a heavy load, as an anonymous poem illustrates. BAYDAWI-FULL: The keys weigh heavily on a strong band of people; تنوء means to bear a load that bends or inclines someone. BURSEVI: The keys' weight made their bearers bend and lean under the load."}, {"id": "28:76/q20/p2", "position": "Nāʾa means to rise or strain under a load", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (reporting أبو زيد): Abu Zayd says نؤت بالحمل means I rose carrying a load, while ناء بي الحمل means the load weighed me down. THALABI: On one construction, the keys lean on and weigh down the group carrying them. WAHIDI-BASIT: Al-Wāḥidī explains النوء as rising with effort and difficulty; ناء بحمله describes laboring under a heavy load. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ذو الرمة): Al-Wāḥidī cites al-Rumma’s nestling poem as evidence for rising with effort; ينوءن witnesses this sense. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd contrasts نؤت بالحمل, I rise with the load, with ناءني الحمل, the load weighed me down; this matches Ibn ʿAbbās’s explanation. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ذو الرمة): A second al-Rumma poem uses تنوء for a hind whose heavy rear makes her rise laboriously. WAHIDI-BASIT: A person is called ناء بحمله because lifting a heavy burden makes the lifter lean. JISHUMI: Nawʾ first means rising under a heavy load; it also names the stars’ rising and setting. BAGHAWI-FULL: The keys were so heavy they burdened and tilted the strong group carrying them. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The verb may be metaphorically predicated of the keys, which rise with strain when carried. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Tanūʾu means to rise or strain under weight; a poem uses it of weak ewes weighed down by feathers. QURTUBI-FULL: Nāʾa means to rise while bearing a heavy load. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو زيد): Abu Zayd says nāʾtu bi-l-ḥiml means that I rose carrying the load. QURTUBI-FULL: The poet’s line illustrates nāʾa as rising with difficulty under weight. SAMIN-DURR: Nāʾa bi-shayʾ means to bear it with difficulty; Abū Zayd glosses nāʾtu bi-l-ʿamal as rising to undertake the work, supported by the cited poems. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The treasures were so abundant that their keys would weigh heavily on a group of strong people carrying them. BIQAI-FULL (reporting الرازي): Al-Razi explains that nuʾ is a star setting from view, and gives both senses of carrying a load: rising under its weight and being tilted by it. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains to Nafiʿ b. al-Azraq that تنوء means to weigh heavily; he confirms Arab usage with Imruʾ al-Qays’s line using ينوء for bearing a load. ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd derives the verb from rising while carrying a load and cites a poem about a camel's hindquarters rising before it tires. IBNASHUR-FULL: Tanūʾ means to weigh heavily; the keys are so heavy that they burden even the strong group carrying them. TABATABAI (reporting المجمع): Al-Majmaʿ defines nāʾa bi-ḥimlih as rising under a heavy burden. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting أبو عبيدة): The verb is unique in form and root in the Qurʾān. The cited lexicons distinguish nāʾtu bi-l-ḥaml, rising while carrying a heavy load, from nāʾanī al-ḥaml, when the load weighs down and overcomes the carrier. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba reads the clause as the company rising with the keys, burdened; Ibn al-Anbārī transmits al-Farrāʾ's alternative that the keys weigh down the company. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الجوهري): Al-Jawharī says nāʾa can mean rising with effort or falling, making it a word of opposites. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting ابن فارس): Ibn Fāris derives the hamzated root from rising: anyone who rises while carrying a weight has nāʾa; the same form can describe a burden weighing someone down. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint al-Shāṭiʾ says nāʾa bi-l-ḥaml means to rise carrying a weight, while nāʾa bihi al-ḥaml means the burden exhausts and tilts its bearer; the Qurʾānic wording stresses a load so great that even strong men tire under it."}, {"id": "28:76/q20/p3", "position": "Nawʾ also describes the setting or rising of a star", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ذو الرمة): Al-Wāḥidī cites al-Rumma’s nestling poem as evidence for rising with effort; ينوءن witnesses this sense. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word also describes a star setting while slanting away from its place of disappearance. QURTUBI-FULL: The poet’s line illustrates nāʾa as rising with difficulty under weight. SAMIN-DURR: Nāʾa bi-shayʾ means to bear it with difficulty; Abū Zayd glosses nāʾtu bi-l-ʿamal as rising to undertake the work, supported by the cited poems. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الجوهري): Al-Jawharī says nāʾa can mean rising with effort or falling, making it a word of opposites."}, {"id": "28:76/q20/p4", "position": "The verb can mean passing or moving away", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabīʿ ibn Anas offers a different gloss for تنوء: to pass by or over the group. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi ibn Anas reads the phrase as making the group lean or move away, deriving it from al-nay, distance. MAWARDI-FULL: The cited line uses nayūn to convey distance or separation, supporting the explanation of al-nay as distance. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another derivation connects the word to naʾy, distance; the cited poem uses yanʾawna for keeping away."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q21", "question": "How is the burden clause construed?", "turns_on": "Causative bāʾ, transferred attribution, literal predication, and the admissibility of poetic inversion.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q21/p1", "position": "The attribution is inverted: the band actually bears the keys", "reasons": "FARRA: Another grammarian shifts verb from band to keys; Farra accepts only with transmitted usage. MAJAZ: Mafātiḥ means keys to treasuries; strong band bears weight via inversion; poetry says haunch bears camel, lances suffer men. TAB-FULL (reporting رجل من أهل العربية): Another grammarian says the band itself bears the keys; the expression shifts the verb onto the keys, as in the cited poetic construction. TAB-FULL (reporting بعض أهل البصرة): Some Basran grammarians treat the wording as a reversal: it means the strong band is burdened by the keys, a construction also illustrated by the cited poetry. TAB-FULL (reporting شاعر): An anonymous line illustrates the reversed construction: one says “I ransomed him with his own self and wealth,” meaning with my own life and wealth. THALABI (reporting أهل البصرة): The Basrans say Arabic reverses the apparent relation, as when one says a woman's rear burdens her although she bears it, like a camel bears its load. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda treats the wording as inverted: the group bears the keys, rather than the keys weighing on the group. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda and al-Akhfash call the construction inverted: the group bears the keys; they cite poetry and an idiom about foul deeds reaching Hajar. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda cites a war poem as evidence for the proposed inversion. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ explains أو بلغت سؤاتهم هجر as their foul deeds reached Hajar, another proposed inversion. IBNATIYYA-FULL: A war poem is cited as another example of syntactic reversal. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The better construction is that the band is weighed down by the keys, an Arabic reversal used by many interpreters. IBNATIYYA-FULL: A poem about giving one’s life and wealth exemplifies the reversal. TABRISI: The anonymous lamp poem is offered as an inversion example: ‘the eye shines by it’ is taken to mean ‘it makes the eye shine.’ TABRISI: Imruʾ al-Qays’s line about an oil lamp in lamp-wicks is another alleged inversion example. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting أبو عبيدة والأخفش): Abu Ubayda and al-Akhfash call it inversion: the group bears the keys' weight, like the cited example of an old woman weighed down by her hips. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting أبو عبيدة والأخفش): The poem فديت بنفسه witnesses the inversion, meaning ‘I ransomed him with my self and wealth.’ ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda treats the syntax as inversion: the keys weigh down the group, as though the text said the group bears them. SAMIN-DURR: One parse makes bāʾ causative like hamza, without inversion: the keys make the strong group stagger under their burden. SAMIN-DURR (reporting أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd proposes inversion: the group is the subject that bears the keys, as in saying a she-camel was presented to a watering trough. BURHAN (reporting المبرد): Al-Mubarrad accepts inversion without qualification beyond requiring that it cause no ambiguity. BURHAN (reporting آخرون): Other scholars say inversion is eloquent when it conveys a subtle point, but otherwise is not; Ibn al-Da'i permits it in interpretation when the reading is near, while remote readings belong only in poetry. BURHAN: In inversion of attribution, the keys are grammatically said to weigh down the group, while the intended sense is that the group strains under the keys; this dramatizes their weight as if they summon strong bearers. BURHAN (reporting الفراء): Al-Farraʾ and others say there is no inversion: the keys weigh down and incline the group carrying 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
