<<chunk 175, part 4 of 0..5>>
bah means a large group without a fixed number, though lexicographers offer several ranges. TABATABAI (reporting قيل): An unattributed view defines ʿuṣba as a group whose members support one another. TABATABAI (reporting المجمع): Al-Majmaʿ defines ʿuṣba as a group whose members are closely bound together. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (reporting İbn Âşûr): Usba means a tightly united, powerful group of ten to forty people; the expression alludes to Qarun’s immense wealth."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p3", "position": "10–40", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: A ʿuṣbah is a group numbering from ten to forty. TAB-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says the band could number anywhere from ten to forty. THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada estimates the group at ten to forty people. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مقاتل): Muqātil gives the range for عصبة as ten to forty people. JISHUMI: ʿUṣba is a group without a singular of the same form; ʿuṣāba is similar, and some say ten to forty or derive it from binding. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda defines the group as ten to forty people. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatāda gives ten to forty people. TABRISI (reporting قتادة): Qatāda defines an ʿuṣba as ten to forty people. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi defines ʿuṣba as ten to forty; Qatada is also reported to give this range. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ). TABATABAI (reporting قتادة): Qatāda says ʿuṣba is a group of ten to forty people. ASAD-NOTES: Usbah means a group of ten or more, up to forty; metonymically it conveys the great weight of Qarun's treasure-chests. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (reporting İbn Âşûr): Usba means a tightly united, powerful group of ten to forty people; the expression alludes to Qarun’s immense wealth. Objection from TABATABAI: Joseph’s nine brothers call themselves ʿuṣba, undercutting the earlier estimates of ten to fifteen, ten to forty, or forty people. | mentions 12:8"}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p4", "position": "10–15", "reasons": "MUJAHID: Mujahid defines a ʿuṣba as ten to fifteen people. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid gives the band as ten to fifteen people in one report and fifteen men in another. IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid defines the group as ten to fifteen people. THALABI (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid defines the group carrying the keys as ten to fifteen people. THALABI (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid estimates the group carrying the keys at ten to fifteen people. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid defines the group as ten to fifteen people. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid defines the group as ten to fifteen people. TABRISI (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid defines an ʿuṣba as ten to fifteen people. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid is also reported to define it as ten to fifteen. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid defines a ʿuṣbah as ten to fifteen men and says the strong group numbered fifteen. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ). IBNASHUR-FULL: ʿUṣba means a group; Mujahid’s nearest estimate is ten to fifteen people. TABATABAI (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says ʿuṣba is a group of ten to fifteen people. Objection from TABATABAI: Joseph’s nine brothers call themselves ʿuṣba, undercutting the earlier estimates of ten to fifteen, ten to forty, or forty people. | mentions 12:8"}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p5", "position": "70", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (reporting قيل): The group is variously said to number seventy, forty, fifteen to forty, or three to ten. IBNABIHATIM (reporting أبو صالح مولى أم هانئ): Abū Ṣāliḥ, the client of Umm Hāniʾ, says the group numbered seventy men. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Abu Salih says the group numbered seventy men. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قيل): One view says the group consisted of forty men; another says seventy. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting أبو صالح): Abu Salih says it means seventy men. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting عكرمة): ʿIkrima says some define the group as forty and others as seventy. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Al-Mawardi reports Abu Salih’s definition of ʿuṣba as seventy men. DURR-FULL (reporting أبو صالح مولى أم هانىء): Abu Salih says the ʿuṣbah numbered seventy men. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ). THALABI (reporting عكرمة): Ikrima reports two estimates: forty or seventy people. THALABI (reporting عكرمة): Ikrima transmits estimates of forty or seventy people."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p6", "position": "3–10", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Another report from Ibn ʿAbbās defines a band as three to ten people. ZAJJAJ (reporting قيل): The group is variously said to number seventy, forty, fifteen to forty, or three to ten. THALABI (reporting الضحاك عن ابن عباس): Al-Dahhak, transmitting from Ibn Abbas, says the group numbered three to ten. THALABI (reporting الضحاك): Al-Dahhak estimates the group at three to ten people. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting الضحاك عن ابن عباس): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk, transmitting from Ibn ʿAbbās, gives the range as three to ten. TABRISI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās defines an ʿuṣba as three to ten people. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الضحاك عن ابن عباس): Al-Dahhak reports from Ibn Abbas that it means three to ten people. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas is also reported to define it as three to ten people. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ). TABATABAI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says ʿuṣba means a group of three to ten people."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p7", "position": "15", "reasons": "MUJAHID: Mujahid specifies fifteen strong men. ABDURRAZZAQ (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid gives the group’s size as fifteen men. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid gives the band as ten to fifteen people in one report and fifteen men in another. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets the phrase as fifteen men. IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says the strong people numbered fifteen. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the group numbered between ten and fifteen. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says fifteen porters; other views give eleven, like Joseph’s brothers, or forty. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says it means fifteen people. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid defines a ʿuṣbah as ten to fifteen men and says the strong group numbered fifteen."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p8", "position": "10", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī defines the group as between ten and forty people. THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada gives the group as between ten and forty people. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الكلبي ومقاتل): Al-Kalbi and Muqatil say the group numbered ten, citing Joseph's brothers calling themselves an ʿuṣba. | mentions 12:8 MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi says the group numbered between ten and forty. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the group numbered between ten and fifteen. RAZI-FULL: ʿUṣba means a large group and is synonymous with ʿiṣāba; the brothers of Joseph were ten, since Joseph and his brother were not with them. | mentions 12:8 QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الكلبي ومقاتل): Al-Kalbi and Muqatil say ʿuṣba means ten, citing Joseph’s brothers’ self-description. | mentions 12:8 DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada reports the ʿuṣbah as more than ten and up to forty men. BURSEVI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the group here consisted of forty men; Qarun's 400,000 keys were carried ten thousand to each man."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p9", "position": "15–40", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbī says a ʿuṣba is a group of fifteen to forty people. ZAJJAJ (reporting قيل): The group is variously said to number seventy, forty, fifteen to forty, or three to ten. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbī defines the group as fifteen to forty people. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj gives the range as fifteen to forty. DURR-FULL (reporting الكلبي): Al-Kalbi gives the ʿuṣbah a range of fifteen to forty men. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ)."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p10", "position": "60", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting خيثمة): A further report gives sixty as the band’s number and says the keys were transported on sixty mules. THALABI (reporting قيل): Another estimate puts the group at sixty. THALABI (reporting قيل): Another estimate places the group at sixty people. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting قيل): Another view defines the group as sixty men."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p11", "position": "3", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): One report from Ibn ʿAbbās gives the band as three people. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the band numbered three. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas defines ʿuṣba as three men."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p12", "position": "3–9", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد): ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd defines the group as three to nine people, a small band. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد): Abd al-Rahman ibn Zayd says the group numbered from three to nine, the range denoted by nafar. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting عبد الرحمن بن زيد): ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn Zayd defines ʿuṣba as three to nine, equivalent to nafar."}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p13", "position": "6–7", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr says a group numbers six or seven. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن جبير): Ibn Jubayr says the group numbered six or seven. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting س
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
