<<chunk 175, part 2 of 0..5>>
them toward collapse. BURHAN (reporting ابن عصفور): Ibn Asfur endorses al-Farisi’s analysis: the intransitive ناء becomes transitive with باء, so the keys make the group lean under their weight; this regular construction is preferable to unlicensed inversion. ITQAN: In an inversion of attribution, the keys are said to weigh down the group (meaning the group bears them); similar constructions reverse the apparent roles of book and term, nursing women, or fire and disbelievers. | mentions 13:38, 28:12, 46:20 ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbaydah and others see inversion, with the group carrying keys; another reading says the keys rise with the group lifting them. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda treats the verse as a transferred or inverted attribution: the company actually bears the keys, though the wording makes the keys the subject of nāʾa. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: The excerpt continues a grammatical debate: one analysis treats the wording as an inversion like a rump weighing down its bearer, while some Kufans reject that explanation. Objection from IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: He rejects imposing inversion on the Qur’an without sound grounds: poets may reverse wording by mistake, for rhyme or meter, or from poetic necessity. Objection from WAHIDI-BASIT: Al-Farrāʾ accepts the inversion only if its proponent heard a transmitted precedent; otherwise he says the man misunderstood the meaning. Objection from IBNATIYYA-FULL: Khudāsh ibn Zuhayr’s verse is not evidence because it reads straightforwardly. Objection from TABRISI: Abū ʿUbayda interprets the phrase as inverted order, meaning the group is weighed down by the keys; the author rejects this as incorrect and unsuitable for Qurʾānic language. Objection from TABRISI: The author rejects using alleged poetic inversions to explain Qurʾānic wording, since examples may be Arab poetic errors; he cites the lamp and Imruʾ al-Qays lines as such cases. Objection from BURHAN: Hazim rejects inversion as a rhetorical figure in the Qur'an, arguing that when Arabs invert order it is frivolity, mockery, imitation, or necessity, none fitting God. Objection from IBNASHUR-FULL: The author rejects Abu ʿUbayda’s claim that the verse uses reversed syntax. Objection from TAB-FULL: An alternative gloss makes the band lift the keys; al-Tabari says this fails to show the great abundance of Qarun’s treasure, since a band could lift few or many keys."}, {"id": "28:76/q21/p2", "position": "The bāʾ is causative: the keys make the band lean under their weight", "reasons": "FARRA: With preposition tanūʾu bihim or tunīʾu bihim; dropping bi adds initial alif; compare 18:96, 19:23. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ takes the bāʾ as causative: the keys make the group bend under their weight; dropping bāʾ requires an initial alif, as in 18:96. | mentions 18:96 IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting سيبويه والخليل): Sībawayh and al-Khalīl reconstruct “the band would be weighed down,” using a preposition to make the verb transitive; Arabs say a load burdens a camel. TABRISI: Bāʾ and hamza can alternate in transitive forms; Arabic says the keys weigh down a group or, in the inverse form, the group bears them. QURTUBI-FULL: The best explanation is that the keys make the group lean under their weight; the wording shifts the preposition so the group appears to strain upward. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The bāʾ is causative: the keys make the group heavy, a construction also attributed to al-Khalīl, Sībawayh, al-Farrāʾ, and preferred by al-Naḥḥās. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): The causative sense is also reported from Ibn ʿAbbās, Abū Ṣāliḥ, and al-Suddī; Arabs say a load weighs down a camel. SAMIN-DURR: One parse makes bāʾ causative like hamza, without inversion: the keys make the strong group stagger under their burden. BURHAN (reporting ابن عصفور): Ibn Asfur endorses al-Farisi’s analysis: the intransitive ناء becomes transitive with باء, so the keys make the group lean under their weight; this regular construction is preferable to unlicensed inversion. BURSEVI: To be burdened by a load means it weighs and bends its bearer; the bā is causative. ALUSI-FULL: Nāʾa bihi means a load weighs someone down until it tilts him; the ba is causative, as in ذهبت به. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الخليل): Al-Khalīl, Sībawayh, al-Farrāʾ, and al-Naḥḥās prefer the straightforward transitive reading; similar sense is reported from Ibn ʿAbbās, Abū Ṣāliḥ, and al-Suddī. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting القرطبي): Al-Qurṭubī calls al-Farrāʾ's reading best: the keys make the company lean under their weight, expressed by a causative construction. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting أبو حيان): Abū Ḥayyān judges the bāʾ causative, meaning the keys make the company heavy; he attributes this analysis to al-Khalīl, Sībawayh, and al-Farrāʾ, and says al-Naḥḥās chose it. TAB-FULL (reporting رجل من أهل العربية): One grammarian takes the phrase to mean that the keys make the band heavy and lean; with the preposition “bā” the verb means “weigh down,” as in 18:96 and 19:23. | mentions 18:96, 19:23 BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda calls the wording inverted: the group is weighed down by the keys; nāʾa means to rise under a heavy burden. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ says the keys weigh down and tilt the company; he analyzes it as latunīʾu al-ʿuṣba, with the bāʾ removed when the tāʾ is opened, like other causative constructions. NASAFI-FULL: The keys weigh down the large group; the bā makes the verb transitive, as in the idiom for a load weighing someone down until he leans."}, {"id": "28:76/q21/p3", "position": "Poetic and grammatical examples test the proposed construction", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: In lahū sawt sawt himar, accusative repeated noun has implied verb, not adjective/appositive. SIBAWAYH: An explicit or implicit verb governs accusative sound noun as model or circumstantial simile. SIBAWAYH: Al-Khalil allows sawt al-himar modifying indefinite sawt as simile; Sibawayh calls analogous rajul akhu Zayd weak poetic necessity. SIBAWAYH: Poetry by al-Nabigha, Ru'bah, al-Ajjaj and Abu Kabir illustrates accusatives through implied verbal action. FARRA: Lamp adorns eye poem cited for alternate construction. TAB-FULL (reporting الأعشى): Al-Aʿshā’s line is another poetic example cited in support of the Arab construction. TAB-FULL (reporting شاعر): An anonymous verse says the lances suffer from the red warriors, while its intended sense is that the warriors suffer from lances; “horses” here means men. TAB-FULL: An Arabic verse calls a prized object an adornment to the eye; al-Tabari says this proposed sense works only if supported by received usage, otherwise its proponent misunderstands it. THALABI: He glosses the first poem as saying, I ransomed him with my life and wealth, illustrating the shifted construction. THALABI: The second poem means the corpulent men are pierced by spears, and الخيل here means men. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting قيس بن الخطيم): Al-Mubarrad cites Qays ibn al-Khaṭīm’s poem as Arabic evidence for making someone alight: تحل بنا means تجعلنا نحلها. TABRISI: The cited line about a thrust by Ḥuṣayn is treated as an example in which an object is expressed as the agent. TABRISI: A rājiz’s verse mistakenly treats pistachios as vegetables, further showing that poetry can contain errors. TABRISI (reporting زهير): Zuhayr’s ‘red one of ʿĀd’ is no mistake for Thamūd: Thamūd was called the later ʿĀd, descended from survivors of the first ʿĀd; their name evokes scant water and smaller numbers. | mentions 53:50 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd defines nāʾa bi-l-ʿamal as rising while bearing it; cited poetry illustrates the verb's sense of bearing a heavy load. SAMIN-DURR (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd explains nāʾtu bi-l-ʿamal as “I rose to carry out the work,” and poetry attests nāʾa with a load. Objection from TABRISI: Although many read Khidāsh’s line as saying men suffer from spears, the author says the spears suffer because they are too noble to be used against such thugs."}, {"id": "28:76/q21/p4", "position": "The keys' weight burdens the band in a direct Arabic construction", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: Indefinite sound noun can imply mithl; definite noun cannot be comparable circumstantial or modifier. FARRA: Alif suppression also in hannaʾanī wa-marraʾanī. MAJAZ: Keys grammatically burden band; intended band struggles under their weight. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari prefers that the keys weigh down the band over the alternative that the band struggles to lift them: it fits the wording and early authorities, and signals the treasure’s great quantity. TAB-FULL (reporting آخرون): An alternative gloss makes the band lift the keys; al-Tabari says this fails to show the great abundance of Qarun’s treasure, since a band could lift few or many keys. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو إسحاق): Abū Isḥāq likewise glosses the phrase as making the group bear a heavy load. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: The basic sense of ثقل is heaviness, the opposite of lightness. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: In the quoted elegy, حلت means that the earth was adorned with the dead. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: ثقل and ثقلة can refer to all of a group's baggage when they travel. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting الفراء وابن قتيبة والزجاج): Al-Farra, Ibn Qutayba, al-Zajjaj and others take the keys as subject: they burden the group; the prefixed ba changes the construction. BURHAN (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says changing the order of paired expressions across passages varies eloquent style; either ordering can achieve the point, though the superior item is usually first. | mentions 2:58, 7:161, 2:7, 45:23"}, {"id": "28:76/q21/p5", "position": "The keys themselves are grammatically said to rise with effort when lifted", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: The best explanation is that the keys make the group lean under their weight; the wording shifts the preposition so the group appears to strain upward. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya allows the keys to be the grammatical subject: they rise with effor
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
