<<chunk 175, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "28:76/q19", "question": "How does the image of keys convey Qārūn's wealth?", "turns_on": "Whether abundance is inferred from many vaults or from the physical weight of their keys.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q19/p1", "position": "Many heavy keys indirectly signify many treasuries and great wealth", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Many keys imply many vaults and thus great wealth, a two-step metonymy; he also cites a line about a timid dog and thin calf as indirect expression. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The heavy keys signify wealth just as heavy food cauldrons signify generosity. KASHSHAF-FULL (reporting أبو رزين): Abū Razīn says one key would suffice for Kufa, underscoring the extraordinary scale of the keys. KASHSHAF-FULL: The description amplifies the burden through treasures, keys, weighing down, a large band, and strong people."}, {"id": "28:76/q19/p2", "position": "The layered image amplifies the scale of Qārūn's wealth", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (reporting أبو رزين لقيط بن عامر العقيلي): The Companion Abu Razin said that one key would suffice for Kufa, meaning one treasure could have a single key; no grading is stated."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q20", "question": "What does latanūʾu say about the burden?", "turns_on": "The root senses of rising, leaning, weighing down, or moving away.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q20/p1", "position": "The phrase says the load weighs down and inclines its bearers", "reasons": "YAHYA-SALLAM: Keys weigh heavily on a strong company. FARRA: Archer under bow weight in Arab poem illustrates nāʾ. FARRA: Mā sāʾaka wa-nāʾaka means troubles and burdens; alif suppressed by parallelism. IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL (reporting بعض أصحاب اللغة): They also read the keys as weighing down the strong group that carries them. TAB-FULL (reporting بعضهم): Some exegetes take “mafātiḥ” here to mean storehouses that weigh down the band. TAB-FULL (reporting شاعر): An anonymous line says a rump weighs women down, but the intended construction is that they bear the rump’s weight. TAB-FULL (reporting بعض أهل البصرة): A Basran example says a woman’s rump “weighs her down,” though she in fact bears its weight; the apparent direction is reversed. TAB-FULL: The people of strength are people of might; the expression describes the keys weighing down and inclining a strong band. An Arab verse about an archer leaning under a bow illustrates ناء. TAB-FULL: In Arab usage ناءك means أناءك with its initial alif dropped by analogy after ساءك, as مرأني likewise drops the alif of أمرأني after هنأني. ZAJJAJ: The phrase means the keys or treasuries weighed heavily on the group. ZAJJAJ (reporting أبو زيد): Abu Zayd says نؤت بالحمل means I rose carrying a load, while ناء بي الحمل means the load weighed me down. IBNABIHATIM (reporting ابن عباس وأبو صالح والسدي وعبد الرحمن بن زيد بن أسلم): Ibn ʿAbbās, Abū Ṣāliḥ, al-Suddī, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd gloss تنوء as weighing heavily. NAHHAS (reporting أبو إسحاق): The best explanation is that the keys make the group lean under their weight, as in expressions where one causes another to go or come. NAHHAS: In the paired idiom mā sāʾahu wa-nāʾahu, nāʾahu is a follow-on to sāʾahu; the expected form would be anāʾahu, as in hanāʾanī wa-marāʾanī and mā qaddama wa-mā ḥadatha. THALABI: On one construction, the keys lean on and weigh down the group carrying them. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس وأبو صالح والسدي): Ibn Abbas, Abu Salih, and al-Suddi say the keys weighed heavily on the group. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi ibn Anas reads the phrase as making the group lean or move away, deriving it from al-nay, distance. WAHIDI-BASIT: Al-Wāḥidī explains النوء as rising with effort and difficulty; ناء بحمله describes laboring under a heavy load. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās explains the wording as the load of the keys weighing down the group. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd contrasts نؤت بالحمل, I rise with the load, with ناءني الحمل, the load weighed me down; this matches Ibn ʿAbbās’s explanation. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ذو الرمة): A second al-Rumma poem uses تنوء for a hind whose heavy rear makes her rise laboriously. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الأزهري): Al-Azharī says the root sense of النوء is leaning to one side. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ cites a poem about an archer whose shoulder leans north after drawing a bow, illustrating الميل في شق. WAHIDI-BASIT: A person is called ناء بحمله because lifting a heavy burden makes the lifter lean. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting المبرد): Al-Mubarrad says the wording really means the keys make the group bend under their burden, like قم بنا meaning make us stand. JISHUMI: Nawʾ first means rising under a heavy load; it also names the stars’ rising and setting. JISHUMI: God gave Qarun stored wealth so vast that its door keys weighed on a strong band of people. BAGHAWI-FULL: The keys were so heavy they burdened and tilted the strong group carrying them. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Tanūʾu means to rise or strain under weight; a poem uses it of weak ewes weighed down by feathers. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Another poem uses nāʾa of a shoulder inclining under strain. TABRISI (reporting أبو زيد): Abū Zayd says nāʾanī al-ḥiml means ‘the load weighed me down.’ IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The keys weighed down the group and made them lean. RAZI-FULL (reporting أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim takes mafātih to mean knowledge and comprehensive access, as in “with Him are the keys of the unseen”; Qarun's varied, abundant treasures burdened their keepers' ability to preserve and oversee them. | mentions 6:59 RAZI-FULL: The idiom nāʾa bihi al-ḥiml means that a load became so heavy it made its bearer lean. QURTUBI-FULL: Nāʾa means to rise while bearing a heavy load. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda reverses the construction: the group strains under the keys’ weight. QURTUBI-FULL: The poet’s line illustrates nāʾa as rising with difficulty under weight. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو زيد): Abu Zayd cites a verse about a servant who stops when he bears a load, illustrating the usage nāʾa bi-l-ḥiml. QURTUBI-FULL: An additional usage, anāʾanī, means “made me heavy”. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو عمرو): Abu ʿAmr says afraḥahu al-dayn means debt weighed him down, citing a poem about burdensome deposits. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting أبو مسلم): Abū Muslim takes the keys as knowledge and exhaustive awareness, like God's “keys of the unseen”; guarding so many kinds of treasure burdens its keepers. | mentions 6:59 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī makes id dependent on the burdening of the keys; the author rejects this because that burden is not confined to the time of the rebuke. SAMIN-DURR (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari makes إذ dependent on تنوء. SAMIN-DURR (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī interprets nāʾa as making the load heavy and causing the carrier to lean; this yields the sense that the keys weigh down the group. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The treasures were so abundant that their keys would weigh heavily on a group of strong people carrying them. BIQAI-FULL (reporting الرازي): Al-Razi explains that nuʾ is a star setting from view, and gives both senses of carrying a load: rising under its weight and being tilted by it. BIQAI-FULL: The treasure keys are so heavy that a strong, mutually supporting group strains under them; the layered wording conveys wealth beyond anyone of Qarun’s rank. BIQAI-FULL: Tanūʾ means to tilt or strain with effort under a heavy burden. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains to Nafiʿ b. al-Azraq that تنوء means to weigh heavily; he confirms Arab usage with Imruʾ al-Qays’s line using ينوء for bearing a load. ITQAN: لتنوء means to weigh heavily. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الشاعر): Arab poets praise restraint at good fortune: one rejects exulting in fortune or despairing at its turns; another likewise praises moderation. ALUSI-FULL (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī attaches إذ قال to تنوء, though the burdening is not limited to that time. IBNASHUR-FULL: Tanūʾ means to weigh heavily; the keys are so heavy that they burden even the strong group carrying them. IBNASHUR-FULL: The ba is associative, not causal as in Imruʾ al-Qays’s line; the author also rejects al-Zamakhshari’s example in which a load burdens its bearer. TABATABAI (reporting المجمع): Al-Majmaʿ defines nāʾa bi-ḥimlih as rising under a heavy burden. TABATABAI: Another lexicographer says the load weighed its bearer down until it tilted him, which Tabataba’i finds more apt here. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting أبو عبيدة): The verb is unique in form and root in the Qurʾān. The cited lexicons distinguish nāʾtu bi-l-ḥaml, rising while carrying a heavy load, from nāʾanī al-ḥaml, when the load weighs down and overcomes the carrier. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting السجستاني): Al-Sijistānī records reciprocal phrasing in which the burden is said to weigh down Zayd just as Zayd bears the burden, and uses the verse as an example. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba reads the clause as the company rising with the keys, burdened; Ibn al-Anbārī transmits al-Farrāʾ's alternative that the keys weigh down the company. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting ابن فارس): Ibn Fāris derives the hamzated root from rising: anyone who rises while carrying a weight has nāʾa; the same form can describe a burden weighing someone down. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī prefers that the keys weigh down and tilt the company: saying the company raises the keys would not itself show abundance, whereas the burden's weight conveys Qarun's vast treasure and follows the early gloss. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الراغب): Al-Rāghib relates the expression to the setting or inclination of a star: a load makes a person heavy and tilts him, until he falls. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint al-Shāṭiʾ says nāʾa bi-l-ḥaml means to rise carrying a weight, while nāʾa bihi al-ḥaml means the burden exhausts and tilts its bearer; the Qurʾānic wording stresses a load so great that even strong men tire under it. STUDYQURAN (reporting c
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
