<<chunk 175, part 3 of 0..5>>
t when the carrier lifts them. BURHAN: In inversion of attribution, the keys are grammatically said to weigh down the group, while the intended sense is that the group strains under the keys; this dramatizes their weight as if they summon strong bearers. ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbaydah and others see inversion, with the group carrying keys; another reading says the keys rise with the group lifting them."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q22", "question": "What variant reading of latanūʾu is reported?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q22/p1", "position": "Budayl or Dalīl reads the verb with masculine yāʾ, with several explanations of agreement", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (reporting بديل بن ميسرة): Badil ibn Maysara reads linūʾu with yāʾ, construing the singular understood referent as the subject. BAYDAWI-FULL: A reading has لينوء with yāʾ, giving the genitive complement the syntactic status of its governing noun. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting أبو عمرو الداني): Abū ʿAmr al-Dānī reports Budayl's singular “key,” which removes the need to explain the masculine verb. SAMIN-DURR (reporting بديل بن ميسرة): Budayl ibn Maysara reads yanūʾu with masculine agreement because he supplies the omitted noun ḥamluhā or thiqluhā as the subject. ALUSI-FULL (reporting بديل بن ميسرة): Budayl reads the verb with masculine yāʾ, لينوء, prompting an explanation for its subject. SAMIN-DURR (reporting الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī also suggests the pronoun in mafātiḥuhu refers to Qārūn, with mafātiḥ acquiring masculine agreement from its genitive complement."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q23", "question": "Why is an alif written near the hamza of latanūʾu?", "turns_on": "Whether it is the hamza's seat with semantic force or an extra alif after wāw.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q23/p1", "position": "The alif is extra after the wāw, not the hamza's seat", "reasons": "BURHAN: The extra alif after the hamza in تبوء and لتنوء signals semantic detail: Cain returns with two sins from one deed, while Qarun’s keys weigh down and tilt the band, suggesting a move from material treasure to the weight of knowledge and the afterlife. BURHAN: The orthography adds alif after mīm in مائة and مائتين, but not فئة; among hamzas preceded by a silent letter, only تبوء and لتنوء have this written alif, and the sole medial case is موئلا. NASHR: The following alif is extra after the plural wāw, by analogy with other words; the author says this may also explain أن تبوء بإثمي. ITQAN: The author says these are not true exceptions because the alif after waw is an extra alif after the verb’s waw, not the hamza’s written seat."}, {"id": "28:76/q23/p2", "position": "The alif is treated as a written sign for the hamza or semantic emphasis", "reasons": "BURHAN: The extra alif after the hamza in تبوء and لتنوء signals semantic detail: Cain returns with two sins from one deed, while Qarun’s keys weigh down and tilt the band, suggesting a move from material treasure to the weight of knowledge and the afterlife. BURHAN: The orthography adds alif after mīm in مائة and مائتين, but not فئة; among hamzas preceded by a silent letter, only تبوء and لتنوء have this written alif, and the sole medial case is موئلا. ITQAN (reporting الفراء): Al-Farra' exempts لتنوأ, أن تبوأ, and السوأى from the rule that a hamza preceded by a consonant with sukun is omitted. Objection from NASHR: The author rejects al-Dānī’s and al-Shāṭibī’s claim that لتنوء is written with an alif for hamza: its hamza is ḍamma, so its image would be wāw and is omitted by the usual rule. Objection from ITQAN: The author says these are not true exceptions because the alif after waw is an extra alif after the verb’s waw, not the hamza’s written seat."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q24", "question": "How is nawʾ used of stars?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q24/p1", "position": "Nawʾ in star usage refers to a setting star and the rising of its opposite", "reasons": "JISHUMI (reporting الأصمعي): Al-Aṣmaʿi describes 28 known stars, one setting in the west at dawn every thirteen nights as its opposite rises, completing a yearly cycle. JISHUMI (reporting ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says people speak of a nawʾ only when rain accompanies the star’s setting and rising. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word also describes a star setting while slanting away from its place of disappearance. BIQAI-FULL (reporting الرازي): Al-Razi explains that nuʾ is a star setting from view, and gives both senses of carrying a load: rising under its weight and being tilted by it. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (reporting الراغب): Al-Rāghib relates the expression to the setting or inclination of a star: a load makes a person heavy and tilts him, until he falls."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q25", "question": "What is said about attributing rain to a star's nawʾ?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q25/p1", "position": "Attributing rain to stars is unbelief; crediting God when a star rises is permissible", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Attributing rain to a star is unbelief; saying God sent it when a star rose is neither error nor unbelief. JISHUMI (reporting رسول الله): The Prophet strongly condemned attributing rain to stars as a pre-Islamic practice."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q26", "question": "What is an ʿuṣba, and how many bearers are meant?", "turns_on": "The term's collective sense and the conflicting reported numerical ranges.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q26/p1", "position": "40", "reasons": "YAHYA-SALLAM: Al-Suddi says strong band numbers forty. FARRA: Keys of treasuries weigh down forty men; maftah means a treasury. TAB-FULL: Some exegetes say the keys weighed down a band of forty men. TAB-FULL (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says the band consisted of forty men. TAB-FULL (reporting الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk reports that people say forty men moved the keys because there were so many of them. TAB-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās gives the band as forty men. ZAJJAJ (reporting قيل): The group is variously said to number seventy, forty, fifteen to forty, or three to ten. IBNABIHATIM (reporting الحكم): Al-Ḥakam says the group numbered forty men. IBNABIHATIM (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī defines the group as between ten and forty people. THALABI (reporting قتادة): Qatada gives the group as between ten and forty people. THALABI (reporting أبو صالح): Abu Salih says the group numbered forty men. THALABI (reporting عكرمة): Ikrima reports two estimates: forty or seventy people. THALABI (reporting عكرمة): Ikrima transmits estimates of forty or seventy people. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting الحكم وقتادة والضحاك): Al-Hakam, Qatada, and al-Dahhak say the group numbered forty men. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi says the group numbered between ten and forty. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says عصبة means forty people. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن عباس): In the transmission of ʿAṭāʾ, Ibn ʿAbbās says forty of the strongest men carried Qarun’s keys. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting قيل): One view says the group consisted of forty men; another says seventy. BAGHAWI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that forty of the strongest men carried Qarūn’s keys. IBNATIYYA-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says fifteen porters; other views give eleven, like Joseph’s brothers, or forty. TABRISI (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says an ʿuṣba is forty men. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting العوفي عن ابن عباس): Al-Awfi reports from Ibn Abbas that عصبة means forty men. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting أبو صالح والحكم بن عتيبة وقتادة والضحاك): Abu Salih, al-Hakam ibn ʿUtayba, Qatada, and al-Dahhak define the group as forty men. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting عكرمة): ʿIkrima says some define the group as forty and others as seventy. DURR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies the ʿuṣbah as forty men. DURR-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatada reports the ʿuṣbah as more than ten and up to forty men. BURSEVI (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the group here consisted of forty men; Qarun's 400,000 keys were carried ten thousand to each man. ALUSI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Reported sizes include ten to fifteen (Mujāhid), fifteen to forty (al-Kalbī), three to ten, ten to forty (Qatāda), forty (Ibn ʿAbbās), and seventy (Abū Ṣāliḥ). TABATABAI (reporting أبو صالح): Abū Ṣāliḥ says ʿuṣba means forty men. Objection from TABATABAI: Joseph’s nine brothers call themselves ʿuṣba, undercutting the earlier estimates of ten to fifteen, ten to forty, or forty people. | mentions 12:8"}, {"id": "28:76/q26/p2", "position": "An ʿuṣba is a group of people whose members support one another", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās explains “tanūʾu” as “weighs down”; al-Ṭabarī explains “ʿuṣbah” as a group. ZAJJAJ: عصبة is a common-purpose group whose members follow and support one another. MAWARDI-FULL: An ʿuṣba is a group whose members support one another. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو إسحاق): Abū Isḥāq defines عصبة as a group united in one affair, following one another’s actions and supporting one another. WAHIDI-BASIT: Al-Wāḥidī questions interpreting عصبة as mules, since the word applies to men. WAHIDI-BASIT: He refers readers to his explanation of عصبة at Joseph 12:8 and 12:14. | mentions 12:8, 12:14 JISHUMI: ʿUṣba is a group without a singular of the same form; ʿuṣāba is similar, and some say ten to forty or derive it from binding. KASHSHAF-FULL: The idiom nāʾa bihi al-ḥiml means a load weighed someone down until it made him lean; ʿuṣba and ʿiṣāba mean a large group and iʿṣawṣabū means gathered together. TABRISI: Another explanation is any group whose members support one another. TABRISI: Nāʾa bi-ḥimlihi means to rise under its weight; anʾāʾ is also used. An ʿuṣba is a tightly joined group. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Ibn al-Jawzi says he explained عصبة earlier in Surat Yusuf. RAZI-FULL: ʿUṣba means a large group and is synonymous with ʿiṣāba; the brothers of Joseph were ten, since Joseph and his brother were not with them. | mentions 12:8 BURSEVI (reporting المفردات): Al-Mufradat explains that ʿuṣbah is a mutually supporting group. ALUSI-FULL: Al-Rāghib says ʿuṣ
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
