<<chunk 176, part 1 of 0..5>>
solence. BIQAI-FULL: Rejoicing in transient possessions shows reliance on them and forgetfulness of the afterlife; it reflects ignorance and poor judgment, leading to arrogance and ruin. BIQAI-FULL (reporting الرازي): Al-Razi says rejoicing in what is not worth rejoicing over brings grief that never ends. BIQAI-FULL: God’s perfection is what merits joy; people deeply rejoicing in what perishes reveal low aspirations, and God does not treat them as beloved. DURR-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi identifies Qarun's advisers as believers from his people, who warned him not to exult lest he become insolent. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid glosses the condemned exultation as giddiness, arrogance, insolence, and failure to thank God for His gifts. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the condemned joy here means transgression (baghy). DURR-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi glosses the condemned joy as insolent pride (baṭar). BURSEVI: The counsel means not to rejoice in worldly wealth; worldly joy is expansive delight in immediate pleasures, especially bodily pleasures. BURSEVI: Worldly joy is blameworthy because it follows attachment and approval of the world and forgetfulness that its pleasures must pass; knowing their transience necessarily brings grief. BURSEVI: The warning echoes the command not to grieve over what passed or rejoice over what was given. | mentions 57:23 BURSEVI: Here, those who rejoice are people exulting in worldly ornaments, which God dislikes. ALUSI-FULL: 'Do not rejoice' means do not become arrogant; worldly joy for its own sake is blameworthy because of love for the world and forgetting its pleasures pass. ALUSI-FULL (reporting أبو الطيب): Abū al-Ṭayyib says greatest grief comes amid joy whose owner knows it will leave. IBNASHUR-FULL: The Qarun example follows the reminder that worldly possessions are only the adornment of this life and their owners will be brought before God. | mentions 28:60, 28:61 IBNASHUR-FULL: Farah can mean joy, as in Yunus 10:22, or excessive elation, arrogance, and conceit, as in the usage at 13:26. | mentions 10:22, 13:26 IBNASHUR-FULL: The prohibited joy is excessive attachment to worldly pleasures that turns one from good works, competition in virtue, spiritual perfection, and religious manners; 28:77 makes this contextual sense explicit. | mentions 28:77 IBNASHUR-FULL: Unqualified joy suggests a settled disposition of conceit and arrogance; the intensive form and causal clause condemn extreme absorption in pleasure, which entails neglect of serious duties. TABATABAI: The prohibition on rejoicing is reinforced by the instruction not to exult over what God gave and that God loves no arrogant boaster. | mentions 57:23 TABATABAI: Qarun trusted his own skill, preferred worldly life, and pursued corruption; God sank him and his house, and no group could help or save him. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Qārūn’s exemplary fate admonishes people seduced by worldly riches who forget God and the Hereafter. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The wise among Qārūn’s people politely warned him not to be arrogant before God, who granted his wealth and dislikes the haughty, reminding him that such people are seized by God. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): One interpretation warns Korah not to be wanton or miserly with his wealth, withholding what is due to others. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): Another interpretation warns against celebrating worldly things as though the Hereafter had no consequences."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p2", "position": "The warning forbids transgression", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says joy in this context means transgression. SULAMI (reporting القاسم): Al-Qāsim says Qarun’s conduct was rebellion and transgression in every condition, and what is rejoiced over may become a source of grief. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid glosses do not rejoice as do not transgress. IBNATIYYA-FULL: His people warn against transgressive delight: indulgence, self-abandonment, arrogance, and conceit. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid also interprets lā tafraḥ as “do not transgress,” and al-fariḥīn as aggressors. DURR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid says the condemned joy here means transgression (baghy)."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p3", "position": "The warning restrains excessive joy", "reasons": "TUSTARI (reporting الأعمش): Al-A'mash recalls attending a funeral where everyone was so grieved that they did not know whom to console. IBNABIHATIM (reporting ابن عباس وقتادة): Ibn ʿAbbās glosses the word as المرحين, and Qatāda is reported to give the same gloss. QURTUBI-FULL: A poem uses mufrāḥ for one who is not excessively elated when fortune favors him. DURR-FULL (reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu al-Darda reports the Prophet saying that God loves every sorrowful heart. DURR-FULL (reporting النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from Abu Dharr urges visiting graves and washing the dead to remember the Hereafter, saying grief places one in God's shade; al-Hakim authenticated it, while al-Bayhaqi called its text munkar. ALUSI-FULL (reporting ابن شمس الخلافة): Ibn Shams al-Khilāfah says transient hardship is better than transient pleasure."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p4", "position": "The warning forbids corruption", "reasons": "THALABI: A poem uses أفرحتك to mean that the deposits corrupted you. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مبشر بن عبد الله): Mubashir ibn ʿAbd Allah interprets lā tafraḥ as “do not corrupt”. TABATABAI: Qarun trusted his own skill, preferred worldly life, and pursued corruption; God sank him and his house, and no group could help or save him."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p5", "position": "The warning forbids miserliness with wealth", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr glosses do not rejoice as do not be miserly. STUDYQURAN (reporting some commentators): One interpretation warns Korah not to be wanton or miserly with his wealth, withholding what is due to others."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p6", "position": "The exultant are mockers", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن عباس): In ʿAṭāʾ’s transmission, Ibn ʿAbbās glosses them as mockers; al-Wāḥidī says mockery is an implication of arrogance, not the actual interpretation."}, {"id": "28:76/q30/p7", "position": "His joy was shirk without fear of punishment", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun's joy was shirk because it came without fear of God's punishment."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q31", "question": "What rejoicing remains permissible?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q31/p1", "position": "Ordinary happiness and joy in God remain permissible", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: The prohibition means do not exult arrogantly or grow proud; ordinary happiness is not blameworthy. THALABI: Here do not rejoice means do not act insolently or arrogantly; ordinary happiness is not blameworthy. | mentions 11:10 WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba and others say the command targets insolent conceit, since ordinary happiness is not blameworthy; compare 11:10. | mentions 11:10 TABRISI: The anonymous poems show farḥ can mean insolent boasting rather than ordinary happiness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Arrogance is blameworthy, but simple happiness is not. BURSEVI: God loves those who rejoice in worship and seek afterlife happiness. BURSEVI: The only permitted rejoicing is in God's grace and mercy and the believers' victory by God's help. | mentions 10:58, 30:4, 30:5 ALUSI-FULL: Worldly joy is not blameworthy when one rejoices in worldly things as a means toward an afterlife purpose."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q32", "question": "What alternative reading of al-fariḥīn is reported?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q32/p1", "position": "Al-fāriḥīn is read with an additional alif", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting أبو رجاء وأبو حيوة وعاصم الجحدري وابن أبي عبلة): These readers read الفارحين with an alif. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (reporting عيسى بن سليمان الحجازي): ʿĪsā ibn Sulaymān al-Ḥijāzī reports the reading al-fāriḥīn. SAMIN-DURR (reporting عيسى الحجازي): Isa al-Hijazi reports الفارحين."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q33", "question": "Do fariḥīn and fāriḥīn differ in meaning?", "turns_on": "Al-Farrāʾ's present/future distinction, al-Zajjāj's equivalence, and the counterexample from mayyit.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q33/p1", "position": "Fariḥ describes present joy, fāriḥ future joy", "reasons": "FARRA: Fāriḥīn also correct; fāriḥ future joy, fariḥ current, like ṭāmiʿ/ṭamiʿ. FARRA: Banū Dubayr poet illustrates sālis/salis paired forms. NAHHAS (reporting الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ distinguishes farḥīn as people currently in joy from fāriḥīn as people who will rejoice later, comparing ṭamiʿ and ṭāmiʿ and mayyit and māʾit. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الفراء): Al-Farraʾ distinguishes the forms: al-fariḥīn are presently joyful, while al-fāriḥīn will rejoice later. QURTUBI-FULL: The Qur’anic phrase “you are dying and they are dying” contradicts al-Farraʾ’s analogy between mayyit and māʾit. | mentions 39:30 IBNASHUR-FULL: The intensive form in لا يحب الفرحين means those excessive in joy; its causal force makes the prohibition a warning against turning from serious obligations. Objection from NAHHAS: The distinction al-Farrāʾ draws is contradicted by 69:21, which says mayyit rather than māʾit for those who are dead. | mentions 69:21"}, {"id": "28:76/q33/p2", "position": "The two forms have the same meaning", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says al-fariḥīn and al-fāriḥīn mean the same thing."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q34", "question": "What does God's not loving the exultant mean?", "turns_on": "Whether withholding love means no mercy, active disfavor, or a deterrent without further punishment.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q34/p1", "position": "God disapproves of arrogant worldly exultation", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: Farah can mean arrogant exultation or insolence, an excess of joy; this is the sense in the verse about those whom God does not love. | mentions 11:10, 40:75 IBNABIHATIM (reporti
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
