<<chunk 176, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "28:76/q30", "question": "What kind of rejoicing does 'do not rejoice' forbid?", "turns_on": "Arrogant worldly elation versus ordinary happiness, and alternative glosses of corruption, miserliness, and transgression.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q30/p1", "position": "The forbidden joy is arrogant, ungrateful elation in worldly wealth", "reasons": "MUJAHID: The exultant are ostentatious, insolent, boastful and ungrateful. MUQATIL: Do not rejoice means do not prance, boast and act arrogantly over wealth; God does not love the arrogant. YAHYA-SALLAM: Do not rejoice means do not exult arrogantly. YAHYA-SALLAM: Al-Suddi says polytheists exult in world, without belief or hope in afterlife. YAHYA-SALLAM: 13:26 identifies worldly rejoicers as polytheists. YAHYA-SALLAM: Ibn Mujahid from father: exultant are insolent, arrogant and ungrateful. FARRA: Report: Moses told Qarun not to exult although of Moses' people and different religion. MAJAZ: Lā tafraḥ means do not behave arrogantly or exultantly; Hudbah poem uses excessive joy. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: The prohibition means do not exult arrogantly or grow proud; ordinary happiness is not blameworthy. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (reporting الشاعر): The poet uses mafarrāḥ for one who is arrogant, not simply happy. IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: Farah first means joy or gladness, as in people rejoicing in a favorable wind at sea. IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: Farah can also mean satisfaction, since satisfaction follows from gladness; the cited groups are content with what they have. | mentions 23:53, 30:32 TUSTARI: Rejoicing in something unworthy of joy brings unending grief; a believer has no rest before meeting God. TAB-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses the rejected ‘joyful’ as people who are exuberant or merry. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid describes them as ostentatious, boastful and ungrateful for what God gave them. TAB-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid also explains the prohibited joy as joy arising from oppression or arrogance. TAB-FULL (reporting قتادة): Qatadah glosses لا تفرح as ‘do not frolic’ and الفرحين as ‘those who frolic.’ IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid describes the disfavored exultant as self-praising, insolent, arrogant, and ungrateful for God’s gifts. IBNABIHATIM (reporting السدي): Al-Suddī says they warned Qārūn not to become insolent because of what he had received. IBNABIHATIM (reporting قتادة): Qatāda glosses لا تفرح as do not praise or boast about yourself. IBNABIHATIM (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid says joy in this context means transgression. NAHHAS (reporting أبو إسحاق): Do not exult in wealth, since such joy results in failing to give wealth its due. SULAMI (reporting القاسم): Al-Qāsim says Qarun’s conduct was rebellion and transgression in every condition, and what is rejoiced over may become a source of grief. SULAMI (reporting سهل): Sahl warns that rejoicing in something unworthy of joy brings unending grief. THALABI: Here do not rejoice means do not act insolently or arrogantly; ordinary happiness is not blameworthy. | mentions 11:10 THALABI: The condemned rejoicers are insolent, ungrateful, arrogant people who fail to thank God for what He gave them. THALABI: A poem uses أفرحتك to mean that the deposits corrupted you. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid glosses do not rejoice as do not transgress. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting ابن بحر): Ibn Bahr glosses do not rejoice as do not be miserly. MAWARDI-FULL (reporting السدي): Al-Suddi glosses do not rejoice as do not become insolently exultant. MAWARDI-FULL: The cited poetry depicts not being carried away by joy when fortune pleases. QUSHAYRI: Although repeatedly admonished to forgo joy in worldly wealth and its enjoyment, Qarun persisted in error. WAHIDI-BASIT: The commentators gloss لا تفرح as do not act arrogantly, revel insolently, behave boastfully, or exult with conceit. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting هدبة): Abū ʿUbayda cites Hudba’s poem using مفراح for someone who is not boastfully elated when fortune pleases him. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن أحمر): Ibn Aḥmar’s poem uses الفرح for arrogance and insolence, glossed as البطر والأشر. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba and others say the command targets insolent conceit, since ordinary happiness is not blameworthy; compare 11:10. | mentions 11:10 WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting أبو إسحاق): Abū Isḥāq says Qarun was told not to exult in worldly wealth, since the person who rejoices in it spends it outside the cause of the afterlife. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting مجاهد): Mujāhid and Muqātil explain the condemned rejoicers as arrogant, ungrateful braggarts who fail to thank God for what He gave them. WAHIDI-BASIT (reporting ابن عباس): In ʿAṭāʾ’s transmission, Ibn ʿAbbās glosses them as mockers; al-Wāḥidī says mockery is an implication of arrogance, not the actual interpretation. DAMGHANI: Farah can mean boastful exuberance and arrogance, which God dislikes; the cited passages gloss it as bطر. JISHUMI (reporting قيل): Qarun’s story confirms the preceding teaching that worldly possessions are fleeting and what is with God is better and more lasting. | mentions 42:36 JISHUMI (reporting أبو علي): Abu ʿAli says Qarun scorned and acted arrogantly toward his people; Jishumi calls this the best explanation. JISHUMI: Worldly rejoicing through vanity and arrogance is blameworthy; one should rejoice in what leads to Paradise. BAGHAWI-FULL: The command not to rejoice means not to become arrogant, insolent, or frolicsome. BAGHAWI-FULL: The disfavored rejoicers are arrogant people who do not thank God for what He has given them. KASHSHAF-FULL: The prohibition echoes the warning not to exult in what God has given, cited from 57:23. | mentions 57:23 KASHSHAF-FULL: The poem’s مفراح describes rejoicing when fortune delights someone; only one settled in worldly life rejoices, while the afterlife-minded know they will soon leave it. KASHSHAF-FULL: A second anonymous couplet captures the grief hidden in joy when its owner knows that separation is near. IBNATIYYA-FULL: His people warn against transgressive delight: indulgence, self-abandonment, arrogance, and conceit. TABRISI: The anonymous poems show farḥ can mean insolent boasting rather than ordinary happiness. TABRISI: The author says Qarun’s story reinforces that worldly goods are temporary and what is with God is better and more enduring, as stated in 42:36. | mentions 42:36 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (reporting ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba says do not exult arrogantly or be insolent; the cited poem uses فرح for arrogance. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Arrogance is blameworthy, but simple happiness is not. RAZI-FULL: Qarun's people tell him not to rejoice with such vanity and worldly attachment that it distracts him altogether from the Hereafter. RAZI-FULL (reporting بعضهم): Some say only someone content with and settled in worldly life rejoices in it; one who knows he will soon leave does not, as al-Mutanabbi aptly observed. RAZI-FULL: Razi calls the Qur'anic wording in 57:23 a more eloquent and concise expression than the preceding poetic line about worldly joy. | mentions 57:23 RAZI-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Qarun's joy was shirk because it came without fear of God's punishment. QURTUBI-FULL: Here lā tafraḥ means do not exult arrogantly or act insolently. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting مجاهد والسدي): Mujahid and al-Suddi explain al-fariḥīn as the arrogant. QURTUBI-FULL (reporting الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says Qarun is told not to rejoice in wealth because such joy does not lead him to fulfill its due. QURTUBI-FULL: The story shows that Qarun possessed worldly adornment yet was not protected from punishment, like Pharaoh; it warns that the opponents are not richer or more numerous than they were. | mentions 28:60 BAYDAWI-FULL: لا تفرح means do not become arrogant in worldly joy; it is blameworthy because worldly pleasure departs, and knowing it must end brings grief. The verse links this to 57:23. | mentions 57:23 NASAFI-FULL: The warning means not to exult arrogantly over wealth; the author compares it with the prohibition in 57:23. | mentions 57:23 NASAFI-FULL: Only someone content and settled in worldly life rejoices in it; a person whose heart looks to the Hereafter knows this world will soon be left behind. NASAFI-FULL: Al-fariḥīn here means those who are arrogant and boastful about their wealth. QASHANI: Veiled by ego and knowledge, Qarun grows arrogant and overbearing; greed and love of worldly life delude him, make him admire his own adornment, and draw him downward until he is swallowed while veiled and detested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qārūn's people condemn the arrogant, intoxicating joy of someone absorbed in worldly success and heedless of the afterlife. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abū al-Ṭayyib's verse illustrates that joy in a passing fortune is grief because its owner knows it will depart. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The author supplies an omitted act of showing off: Qārūn displayed pride in his treasures when his people told him not to rejoice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The warning against rejoicing recalls 57:23; an Arab poem praises not exulting when fortune smiles or despairing when it turns. | mentions 57:23 SAMIN-DURR: Al-Samin says al-Shaykh's estimate of showing joy fits. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Qarun's people advised him not to become arrogant and overbearing because of his wealth. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses the joy condemned here as being frivolous and boastful. IBNKATHIR-FULL (reporting مجاهد): Mujahid glosses the condemned joy as insolent arrogance and ingratitude for God's gifts. BIQAI-FULL: After the partners’ helplessness in the Hereafter, the text shows God’s rule in this world by destroying arrogant people who cannot save one another. BIQAI-FULL: Those who boast in gifts must recognize God’s right in what the messengers and scriptures teach; worldly possessions cannot save those who rely on them as if they secured lasting happiness. BIQAI-FULL: The warning targets joy in perishable wealth that settles into the heart and burns into arrogance and in
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
