<<chunk 176, part 3 of 0..5>>
:60"}, {"id": "28:76/q42/p2", "position": "Kinship with a prophet cannot protect a transgressor", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Qarun’s wealth and arrogance exemplify Meccan figures: Abu Lahab and Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith in kinship and abuse, al-ʿAsi ibn Waʾil in abusing Khabbab, and al-Walid ibn al-Mughira in boasting of wealth and dependents. | mentions 74:11, 74:12 JISHUMI: Qarun’s kinship with Moses’ people did not benefit him without faith. BIQAI-FULL: Qarun’s destruction warns those who accuse the Prophet of magic and shows that prophets separate from the wretched even when they are close kin. BIQAI-FULL: God destroyed Qarun and his companions with an unprecedented punishment, though they were Israelites and among Moses’ closest people."}, {"id": "28:76/q42/p3", "position": "Wealth is God's gift and carries duties toward Him and others", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Jishumi infers that Qarun’s wealth was lawful because God says He gave it to him. JISHUMI: Vast lawful wealth could come from pre-Islamic treasures, inheritance, trade or farming by a large household, earnings, or spoils; Pharaoh’s appointment of Qarun over Israel may have enabled business, and sources could combine. BIQAI-FULL: Those who boast in gifts must recognize God’s right in what the messengers and scriptures teach; worldly possessions cannot save those who rely on them as if they secured lasting happiness. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The fate of a wealthy Jewish capitalist shows that God grants favors, though the wretched attribute them to their own ability and idols."}, {"id": "28:76/q42/p4", "position": "The fate warns wealthy Meccan opponents against trusting status", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Quraysh’s wealthy leaders resisted Muhammad and disparaged poor followers, claiming revelation should come to a wealthy notable; the Qur’an repeatedly rebukes this status-by-wealth assumption. | mentions 43:31, 34:35, 73:11 IBNASHUR-FULL: The story opens as an example for Meccan leaders such as al-Walid ibn al-Mughira and Abu Jahl, and attaches to the preceding account of worldly goods and resurrection. | mentions 28:60, 28:61"}]}
{"id": "28:76/q43", "question": "How does Qārūn's account connect with its context and other verses?", "turns_on": "The notes link it to Moses' history, worldly goods, judgment, Meccan opponents, Pharaoh, and the next sūra.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q43/p1", "position": "It illustrates the preceding contrast between fleeting possessions and the Hereafter", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI: The people described in the preceding passage have no defense, excuse, merciful intercessor, or helper; their error is evident and everlasting punishment overtakes them. BIQAI-FULL: The general warning about towns ruined for their prosperity is applied to Qarun as a particular example. | mentions 28:58 BIQAI-FULL: Their worldly dependence resembles the spider that takes a house, a comparison found in the following sūra. | mentions 29:41 IBNASHUR-FULL: The story opens as an example for Meccan leaders such as al-Walid ibn al-Mughira and Abu Jahl, and attaches to the preceding account of worldly goods and resurrection. | mentions 28:60, 28:61 ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The passage resumes the topic from verse 61 after the secondary discussion of polytheism concludes at verse 75; verses 76–84 continue the original theme. | mentions 28:61"}, {"id": "28:76/q43/p2", "position": "The account continues or recalls Moses' earlier story", "reasons": "JISHUMI (reporting قيل): The story is linked to Moses’ promised history at the start of the surah. TABRISI: Qarun’s story continues the promised account of Moses: it is another episode from Moses’ story. IBNASHUR-FULL: The Qarun story also connects with the close of the Pharaoh-soldiers narrative, which ends with the reminder that Muhammad was not at the Mount when God called. | mentions 28:46"}, {"id": "28:76/q43/p3", "position": "It links Qārūn with Pharaoh or the next sūra's spider image", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: Their worldly dependence resembles the spider that takes a house, a comparison found in the following sūra. | mentions 29:41 IBNASHUR-FULL: The Qarun story also connects with the close of the Pharaoh-soldiers narrative, which ends with the reminder that Muhammad was not at the Mount when God called. | mentions 28:46 ASAD-NOTES: Asad says Qarun's moral role explains why the Qur'an juxtaposes him with Pharaoh, the arch-sinner. | mentions 29:39, 40:24"}, {"id": "28:76/q43/p4", "position": "It warns the Prophet's wealthy Meccan opponents", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: Qarun’s destruction warns those who accuse the Prophet of magic and shows that prophets separate from the wretched even when they are close kin. IBNASHUR-FULL: The story opens as an example for Meccan leaders such as al-Walid ibn al-Mughira and Abu Jahl, and attaches to the preceding account of worldly goods and resurrection. | mentions 28:60, 28:61 IBNASHUR-FULL: The wording about Qarun’s people prepares an analogy with the harm Muhammad suffered from his own idolatrous relatives."}, {"id": "28:76/q43/p5", "position": "It continues the warning about disgrace and punishment", "reasons": "QUSHAYRI: The people described in the preceding passage have no defense, excuse, merciful intercessor, or helper; their error is evident and everlasting punishment overtakes them. TABRISI: Another connection is that, after describing unbelievers’ disgrace on Judgment Day, the commentary identifies Qarun as one of them, to be disgraced then as he was in this life."}, {"id": "28:76/q43/p6", "position": "The story develops the sūra's moral sequence", "reasons": "TABATABAI: The Qarun narrative follows the polytheists’ fear that following guidance would get them driven from their land: his fate warns them that rejecting God leads to ruin and could befall them too. ASAD-NOTES: The sentence structure shows that even a follower of a great apostle can sin through pride and self-exaltation, exemplifying the preceding passage's false imagery."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q44", "question": "How should the verse's accidental poetic meter be understood?", "turns_on": "Whether metrical coincidence makes a Qur'anic phrase poetry, and what Quraysh's accusation meant.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q44/p1", "position": "The verse can incidentally coincide with a poetic meter", "reasons": "BURHAN: The section asks about Qur’anic phrases that coincide with metrical poetry, whether a full line, several lines, or a hemistich, while treating such coincidence as distinct from poetry. BURHAN: The author adds Qur’anic phrases as examples of metrical coincidence, including night worship, charity, disputing, the flood, Abu Lahab, victory, conversion, and Qarun. | mentions 50:40, 3:92, 18:22, 11:43, 111:1, 61:13, 8:38, 28:76 IBNASHUR-FULL: The sentence happens to scan as a hemistich in al-Khafif meter; Qur’anic rhetorical circumstances can call for wording whose rhythm coincides with a poetic meter."}, {"id": "28:76/q44/p2", "position": "Metrical coincidence does not make the Qur'an poetry or explain Quraysh's charge", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint explains that al-Jāḥiẓ's comparison with spontaneous everyday speech answered those who claimed that isolated Qurʾānic phrases fit poetic meter, not Quraysh's charge that the Qurʾān was poetry. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: She rejects the comparison with servants, commoners, and sellers of eggplant as inadequate to defend the Qurʾān's supreme discourse from the charge of poetry. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint rejects al-Bāqillānī's suggestions that Quraysh meant some Qurʾānic passages matched poetic meters: they would not mistake a few lines for poetry, but recognized the Qurʾān's eloquent spell; al-Walīd ibn al-Mughīra said Arabs would reject the poet label and settle on sorcery that divides families."}]}
{"id": "28:76/q45", "question": "What other rhetorical comparisons accompany discussion of this verse?", "turns_on": "The cited notes range over comparison, fronting, digression, and poetic evaluation.", "positions": [{"id": "28:76/q45/p1", "position": "Fronting changes prominence or grammatical role according to context", "reasons": "BAQILLANI: The first horse line uses familiar material about speed and is neither unprecedented nor beyond the conventional comparisons poets already used. JURJANI-ASRAR: With an explicit kāf-simile the comparison noun is normally definite, while an indefinite needs a qualifying adjective; as a predicate, however, both definite and indefinite forms are natural. JURJANI-DALAIL: In the comparison with وجعلوا الجن شركاء لله, the stated order makes partners specific to jinn; fronting شركاء broadens the meaning to deny any partner, yielding more meaning in fewer words. | mentions 6:100 JURJANI-DALAIL: Fronting can preserve a word's grammatical role, as when a predicate or object is moved before its subject, or can transfer it into a new role. JURJANI-DALAIL: In a second kind of fronting, word order changes grammatical roles: المنطلق زيد makes المنطلق the subject, while زيد ضربته makes زيدا a subject and the verb's object a pronoun. JURJANI-DALAIL (reporting صاحب الكتاب): The cited grammar authority says speakers put first what they most need to clarify and care about, although both participants matter. JURJANI-DALAIL (reporting النحويون): Grammarians illustrate the principle with killing an outlaw: listeners care that he was killed, not which person killed him, so the outlaw is mentioned first. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT: Different specialists can show how a single expression's artistry works from their disciplines, while a linguist identifies its exact word choice, order, and emphasis."}, {"id": "28:76/q45/p2", "position": "Poetic figures and lexical choices are assessed by their context", "reasons": "BAQILLANI: The Quranic example moves from the particular image of shadows to the broader report that every creature and the angels prostrate to God. | mentions 16:48, 16:49 BAQILLANI: Al-Bāqillānī names exception as another poetic figure and illustrates it with al-Nābigha's claim t
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
