<<chunk 193, part 5 of 0..5>>
a diverse group. BURSEVI, d. 1127: When the plot to kill Moses spread, his friends grieved and his enemies rejoiced; God protected him and raised an outsider to calm the crisis and defend him. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Both arguments indirectly target Pharaoh: as a blood-shedding profligate liar, God will not help him kill Moses, and Pharaoh will only bring harm on himself. ELMALILI, d. 1361: At first he speaks cautiously without revealing his faith, arguing from the injustice of killing a man for saying that his Lord is God and from the proofs Moses had brought. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The man was a righteous thinker in monotheistic proofs whose faith settled after hearing Moses; God raises protectors for righteous servants in hardship. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: God inspired the man to speak, the first sign of answering Moses’s appeal for refuge; once Pharaoh’s threat spread, the trusted member of his household came to advise him. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The question is directed to Pharaoh, who ordered the killing; the next statement identifies him as speaking without a coordinating waw (40:29). | mentions 40:29 TABATABAI, d. 1402: The question condemns their plan to kill Moses; the signs establish that God is their Lord too, so Moses brought them truth from their Lord. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İbn Âşûr): Ibn Ashur says the unnamed believer was probably a virtuous, thoughtful man searching for religious truth who recognized it in Moses’ call, believed, and intervened to dissuade Pharaoh; Pharaoh heeded his advice because he belonged to his own people. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Pharaoh’s claim that he only shows what he sees suggests the believer’s words seemed justified to others, or at least raised doubts about whether killing Moses was right. STUDYQURAN: In either account, he is the man in 28:20 who ran to warn Moses that the notables plotted against him. | mentions 28:20 TAB-FULL: kill Moses for saying Lord God; signs show truth; أن accusative IBNASHUR-FULL: man seeks to save Moses by opening debate without provoking hostility"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q15", "question": "What is the force of the question about killing?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q15/p1", "position": "Killing a man for his truthful confession is censured", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: The question forcefully condemns the atrocious killing of an inviolate person for no reason but his truthful confession; the believer also reminds them that the God he names is their Lord too, softening their fury. TABRISI, d. 548: The question rebukes them; using a participle meaning a man who says my Lord is God would not show that belief is the reason for killing him. TABRISI, d. 548: The subjunctive أن يقول is a causal object, meaning they would kill him because he says that his Lord is God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: The phrase means “because he says, ‘My Lord is God’” and is a rebuking rhetorical question. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The question is an emphatic denial: the man has only said his Lord is God and brought signs, neither of which warrants killing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Asking whether they will kill a man merely for saying his Lord is God is a forceful rebuke: their only basis for killing him is his truthful statement, despite proofs from their own Lord. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari permits supplying a deleted noun of time, وقت أن يقول, and takes the question to rebuke killing him immediately after hearing the claim without reflection. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He frames their intended killing as an appalling question and calls Moses a man of great physical and moral stature. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He objects that they would kill Moses merely for repeatedly saying his Lord is God, though God has already sent him clear, unambiguous signs. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The question means are you intending to kill him: it names the result, killing, while intending is the cause; its interrogative force does not require an actual killing. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The question is one of censure: it is disgraceful to kill someone merely for saying God is his Lord; he neither coerced them to believe nor did more than state his view, so they could accept or reject it. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The question condemns their plan to kill Moses; the signs establish that God is their Lord too, so Moses brought them truth from their Lord. MAWARDI-FULL: kill just for saying Lord God"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q16", "question": "How is an yaqūla construed?", "turns_on": "Whether an yaqūla is causal or follows an omitted time noun; grammarians dispute whether that ellipsis is licensed.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q16/p1", "position": "An yaqūla expresses the cause or purpose of killing", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516: The phrase an yaqūla means because he says, 'My Lord is God.' KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: أن يقول means because he says; alternatively, a noun for time is understood, meaning at the moment he said it. TABRISI, d. 548: The subjunctive أن يقول is a causal object, meaning they would kill him because he says that his Lord is God. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: The phrase means “because he says, ‘My Lord is God’” and is a rebuking rhetorical question. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: An here means because: it is accusative after deletion of a governing preposition. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The phrase means “because he says”; the believer condemns killing a protected person when the only alleged offense is speaking the truth that Allah is his Lord—and theirs too. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The phrase أن يقول is causal, meaning because he says my Lord is God. | mentions 4:42 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: أن يقول means either because he says or on account of saying. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الشيخ): The Sheikh rejects the omitted-time parse: a time noun may be supplied with an explicit verbal noun, as in صياح الديك, but not with أن يصيح; grammarians state this rule. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو حيان): Abu Hayyan objects that a complement standing for a temporal noun must be an explicit verbal noun or a durative mā clause, not the non-explicit أن construction. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The phrase means because he says my Lord is God. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: An yaqul is governed by an implied lām of purpose, which is often omitted before أن. ZAJJAJ: أن because he says NAHHAS: أن يقول accusative because THALABI: أن because IBNATIYYA-FULL: أن يقول purpose complement because Lord God"}, {"id": "40:28/q16/p2", "position": "An omitted time noun makes it mean 'when he says it'", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: أن يقول means because he says; alternatively, a noun for time is understood, meaning at the moment he said it. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The phrase can mean because he says or at the time he says, without reflection or consideration. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari allows an omitted time noun, meaning would you kill him at the moment you hear him speak, without examining his case. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni, like al-Zamakhshari, expressly permits the proposed construction; al-Ālūsī says this settles the objection."}, {"id": "40:28/q16/p3", "position": "The grammar does not force a future event", "reasons": "BURHAN, d. 794: Al-Zarkashi says this contradicts the rhetoricians’ consensus: the cited questions refer to past actions; no evidence supports future reference, and the grammar of أتقتلون does not determine the intended time. BURHAN, d. 794 (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni notes that grammatical inflection can differ from the meaning; the future-subjunctive أن in “that he says” does not make the condemnatory question’s event future in sense."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q17", "question": "What does 'my Lord is God' affirm?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q17/p1", "position": "It affirms God alone as Lord", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516: The phrase an yaqūla means because he says, 'My Lord is God.' KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: The question forcefully condemns the atrocious killing of an inviolate person for no reason but his truthful confession; the believer also reminds them that the God he names is their Lord too, softening their fury. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The man whom Pharaoh’s people consider killing for saying “My Lord is God” is identified as Moses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: The phrase means “because he says, ‘My Lord is God’” and is a rebuking rhetorical question. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The believer's phrase “my Lord is God” points to monotheism, while “clear proofs” refers to evidence for it, including Moses' statements in 20:50 and 26:24. | mentions 20:50, 26:24 BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: My Lord is God means God alone, with the same restrictive force as my friend is Zayd. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The phrase أن يقول is causal, meaning because he says my Lord is God. | mentions 4:42 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The proofs are evidence for monotheism, as in the debates with Pharaoh recorded in Ta Ha and al-Shu'ara'. | mentions 20:49, 26:23 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The believer reasons that saying my Lord is God, or their saying our lord is Pharaoh, warrants no killing; since Moses names their true Lord too, he deserves respect, not betrayal. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The phrase means because he says my Lord is God. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Moses named God because this was the deity he invoked, unlike the names of the Coptic gods. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The believer’s appeal that Moses said God was his Lord presents monotheism as an indisputable truth deserving support, not execution."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
