<<chunk 193, part 1 of 0..5>>
oh’s family was Pharaoh’s cousin and of Coptic origin. STUDYQURAN (IJ, IK, Q, Ṭ): Many identify the believing man as Pharaoh’s cousin. TAB-FULL: Suddi cousin and escaped with Moses THALABI: Suddi Muqatil cousin and 28:20 man MAWARDI-FULL: Suddi cousin escaped with Moses MAWARDI-FULL: Kalbi name Hizbil crown prince MAWARDI-FULL: clause points Moses if believer speaking IBNASHUR-FULL: man seeks to save Moses by opening debate without provoking hostility"}, {"id": "40:28/q03/p2", "position": "He was an Israelite", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (قوم): Some say the believing man was an Israelite, with min āli Firʿawn understood as describing whom he concealed his faith from. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: One account makes the believer a Copt and Pharaoh’s cousin who secretly believed in Moses; another says he was an Israelite. The author favors Pharaoh’s kin, since Israelite believers were not few or weak. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): Another group says he was an Israelite, with the phrase reordered to mean a man concealing his faith who was from Pharaoh’s people. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (أهل التفسير): Āl can mean a man’s household and relatives by descent; the believer is Pharaoh’s kin, not an Israelite, explaining Pharaoh’s acceptance of his plea about Moses. | mentions 15:61, 54:34 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (أبو بكر من أصحابنا): Abū Bakr of the author’s associates says the believer is Pharaoh’s kin, not an Israelite, explaining Pharaoh’s acceptance of his plea about Moses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (قوم): Some say he was an Israelite and that “from Pharaoh's people” means he concealed his faith among them. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (قيل): A third identification says he was an Israelite. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): Another report from al-Suddi makes the believer an Israelite who concealed his faith from Pharaoh's people, requiring fronted-and-delayed word order. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: If he was Coptic, min describes his affiliation as a member or relative of Pharaoh's household; if Israelite, it attaches to yaktum as the second object. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: From Pharaoh's family may mean his relatives; alternatively, it attaches to concealing his faith, and the man was an Israelite or a foreign monotheist feigning agreement. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): Another account makes him an Israelite, with “from Pharaoh's people” modifying “concealing his faith,” meaning he hid it from Pharaoh's family; he is variously named Samʿān, Ḥabīb, Khirbīl or Ḥizbīl. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarīr preferred that the man was a Copt from Pharaoh's family and rejected the Israelite identification, since Pharaoh listened to him and stopped short of killing Moses. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: For the Israelite or outsider identifications, he is called one of Pharaoh’s people because he entered their circle and concealed his faith by outwardly professing their religion from fear. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: This is not the Israelite in 28:20, who helped Moses shortly before his departure from Egypt; the present story occurs as Moses begins returning. Exodus identifies the earlier man as Israelite. | mentions 28:20 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İbn Âşûr): Ibn Ashur identifies this believer with the person alluded to in Exodus 10:7, where Pharaoh’s servants urge him to release the Israelites to worship God. STUDYQURAN (IJ, Ṭ): Others say he was an Israelite, reading the phrase as a believer concealing his faith from Pharaoh’s family. TAB-FULL: Israelite concealed faith from Pharaoh people TAB-FULL: Israelite reading pause after يكتم إيمانه TAB-FULL: Tabari prefers Pharaoh people because heard him; Israelite punished THALABI: Israelite hid from Pharaoh people ALUSI-FULL: believer Copt cousin/heir/police, Israelite, or outsider"}, {"id": "40:28/q03/p3", "position": "He was a Copt from Pharaoh's people", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (مقاتل والسدي): Muqātil and al-Suddī say the believer was an Egyptian, Pharaoh's cousin, and the man described in Q 28:20. | mentions 28:20 IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542: He also allows that the man was not a Copt but counted among Pharaoh’s people because he outwardly followed Pharaoh’s religion and adherents. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن وغيره): Al-Hasan and others say the believer was a Copt; al-Suddi says he was Pharaoh's cousin and escaped with Moses. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): One account makes the believer a Copt and Pharaoh's cousin who secretly believed in Moses; Nasafi says this first account is the apparent one. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The well-known view is that the believing man was a Copt from Pharaoh's household. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The man had concealed his faith from the Copts, then openly rebuked Pharaoh out of anger for God; the commentator calls this a just word before an unjust ruler, the greatest such word before Pharaoh. ELMALILI, d. 1361: The apparent meaning of being from Pharaoh’s household points instead to an Egyptian, perhaps a member of Pharaoh’s own dynasty. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Moses named God because this was the deity he invoked, unlike the names of the Coptic gods. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The context makes “from Pharaoh’s household” and “concealing his faith” two descriptions: he is a Copt in Pharaoh’s inner circle, whose faith they do not know. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The believer belonged to Pharaoh’s royal family, loved truth, and had sympathized with Moses’ reform before prophethood; after Moses killed a Copt, he warned Moses and urged his escape to Madyan. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Zamakhshari and Razi report that the believer from Pharaoh’s family was Pharaoh’s cousin and of Coptic origin. MUQATIL: believer Copt like Pharaoh concealed faith for one hundred years until killing plot IBNJAWZI-ZAD: آل means tribe; Qatada Muqatil say Copt"}, {"id": "40:28/q03/p4", "position": "He was an outsider to both groups", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: From Pharaoh's family may mean his relatives; alternatively, it attaches to concealing his faith, and the man was an Israelite or a foreign monotheist feigning agreement. BURSEVI, d. 1127: When the plot to kill Moses spread, his friends grieved and his enemies rejoiced; God protected him and raised an outsider to calm the crisis and defend him. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: For the Israelite or outsider identifications, he is called one of Pharaoh’s people because he entered their circle and concealed his faith by outwardly professing their religion from fear. STUDYQURAN (al-Ṭabarī): Al-Ṭabarī argues he was from Pharaoh’s family because a court outsider would not have been heard. ALUSI-FULL: believer Copt cousin/heir/police, Israelite, or outsider"}, {"id": "40:28/q03/p5", "position": "He was an Egyptian Copt but not kin", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (قيل): A second identification says he was a Copt among Pharaoh's people but not a relative. MAWARDI-FULL: Muqatil Copt but not family"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q04", "question": "What name is reported for the believing man?", "turns_on": "The reports transmit different personal names, sometimes with slight spelling variants.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q04/p1", "position": "Ḥabīb", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516: Another reported name for the believer is Ḥabīb. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: His name is given variously as Samʿān, Ḥabīb, or Ḥizbīl; the source also repeats the last form. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another view says he was Pharaoh's designated successor and was named Ḥabīb. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (كعب): Kaʿb gives the believer's name as Habib. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (رسول الله): A report from the Prophet names three foremost believers: Ḥabīb al-Najjār, the believer from Pharaoh's household, and ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, whom it calls the best of them; Razi gives no grading. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعض المفسرين): Some commentators identify the believer as Habib. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari gives Simʿan or Habib as names, and also reports Khurbil or Hizbil. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): Another account makes him an Israelite, with “from Pharaoh's people” modifying “concealing his faith,” meaning he hid it from Pharaoh's family; he is variously named Samʿān, Ḥabīb, Khirbīl or Ḥizbīl. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The believer is named Saman, Habib, or Hizqil; most read رجل with a damma, while Isa, Abd al-Warith, Ubayd ibn Aqil, and Hamza ibn al-Qasim read it with sukun, a Tamimi and Najdi form. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (بعضهم): Another identification is Ḥabīb al-Najjār, said to have made the chest in which Moses’s mother placed him in the river; he is distinguished from the man of Yā Sīn. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (النبي): A Prophetic report counts Ḥizqīl, the believer among Pharaoh’s people, Ḥabīb al-Najjār of Yā Sīn, and ʿAlī as three who never disbelieved; it says ʿAlī is best among them. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The believer is variously named Shamaʿan, Kharbil, Hizbil, or Habib. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The man is said to have been named Habib al-Najjar or Samʿan; Ibn ʿAshur notes that Habib in Ya Sin was one of Jesus’s messengers. | mentions 36:20 ZAJJAJ: name Habib THALABI: Abu Ishaq name Habib MAWARDI-FULL: Ibn Ishaq name Habib"}, {"id": "40:28/q04/p2", "position": "Samʿān or Shamaʿān", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: His name is given variously as Samʿān, Ḥabīb, or Ḥizbīl; the source also repeats the last form. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (شعيب الجبائي): Shuʿayb al-Jubbaʾi gives the name as Samiʿun, with the letter sin. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq transmits the name Shamʿan with shin; al-Zajjaj and Ibn Makula also report this spelling. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السهيلي): Al-Suhayli considers Shimaʿan, with dotted shin, the strongest reported name. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari gives Simʿan or Habib as names, and also reports Khurbil or Hizbil. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): Another account makes him an Israelite, with “from Pharaoh's people” modifying “concealing his faith,” meaning he hid it from Pharaoh's family; he is variously named Samʿān, Ḥabīb, Khirbīl or Ḥizbīl. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The believer is named Saman, Habib, or Hizqil; 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
