<<chunk 193, part 4 of 0..5>>
followed by the thing concealed. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: من آل فرعون may attach to يكتم, meaning he conceals his faith from Pharaoh's people; on this parse the verse does not show that the believer was related to Pharaoh. BURHAN, d. 794: The description with a single adjective precedes the clausal description: “believing” comes before the clause “concealing his faith.” BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He conceals his faith intensely from fear, using indirect counsel to stop them from killing Moses; a lone dissenter from a tribe is more vulnerable than someone among a diverse group. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: For the Israelite or outsider identifications, he is called one of Pharaoh’s people because he entered their circle and concealed his faith by outwardly professing their religion from fear. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Another parse attaches min āli Firʿawn to concealing his faith, restricting the concealed believer to Pharaoh’s household rather than Moses’ followers; stopping after believer is then possible. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He continually concealed his faith as protective dissimulation because disclosure would harm him without helping anyone; Ibn ʿAshur compares him with Socrates in Greece. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (أبو عبد الله عليه السلام): In al-Majmaʿ, Imam al-Ṣādiq says taqiyya is his and his fathers’ religion, indispensable to religion and God’s shield on earth; the believer would have been killed had he disclosed Islam. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Tabatabai says Shia reports on taqiyya are numerous and cites Qur’anic allowances for fearing hostile people and for a coerced believer. | mentions 3:28, 16:106 TABATABAI, d. 1402 (قيل): A reported parse makes “from Pharaoh’s household” the second object of “conceals,” placed before the verb. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (المصباح): Al-Miṣbāḥ allows the second object of “conceals” to take min, though the usual construction is direct. | mentions 4:42 TABATABAI, d. 1402: The context makes “from Pharaoh’s household” and “concealing his faith” two descriptions: he is a Copt in Pharaoh’s inner circle, whose faith they do not know. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: He embraced faith after Moses returned from Madyan but concealed it for a long time, apparently to serve Moses’ call more effectively from within Pharaoh’s House of Lords. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Concealing faith for religious benefit may be permissible, but becomes hypocrisy once religion faces decisive danger; the believer spoke openly when Moses’ life was threatened. STUDYQURAN (IJ, Ṭ): Others say he was an Israelite, reading the phrase as a believer concealing his faith from Pharaoh’s family. TAB-FULL: believer Pharaoh people hid faith in fear TAB-FULL: Israelite concealed faith from Pharaoh people ZAJJAJ: min آل adjective; conceal from them supplied THALABI: Pharaoh household hid faith for fear"}, {"id": "40:28/q11/p2", "position": "He concealed faith until Moses faced death, then spoke", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542: The believer’s public challenge shows he confronted Pharaoh more than he merely accommodated him and stated Moses’ prophethood openly. TABRISI, d. 548: Dissimulation is God's shield on earth, because the believing man from Pharaoh's family would have been killed had he openly declared Islam. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Al-Qurtubi limits Ali's remark to the believer's initial concealment: the Quran says he openly declared faith when Moses was threatened with death. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The man had concealed his faith from the Copts, then openly rebuked Pharaoh out of anger for God; the commentator calls this a just word before an unjust ruler, the greatest such word before Pharaoh. ELMALILI, d. 1361: He concealed his faith and used secret stratagems to keep Pharaoh at bay for a time; when Moses’ execution was decided, he came forward, beginning with gradual counsel and then open opposition. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Had he declared faith earlier, Pharaoh could have publicly disgraced him as a national rebel and stripped him of his royal standing. MAWARDI-FULL: Dahhak concealed to deal gently then declared while concealed"}, {"id": "40:28/q11/p3", "position": "He concealed faith for a hundred years", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (مقاتل): Muqatil says the believer concealed his faith from Pharaoh for one hundred years. MUQATIL: believer Copt like Pharaoh concealed faith for one hundred years until killing plot"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q12", "question": "What does his concealment teach about dissimulation?", "turns_on": "How fear, benefit, and decisive danger affect concealment.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q12/p1", "position": "Protective dissimulation is permitted or indispensable", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو عبد الله): Abū ʿAbd Allāh says dissimulation is part of his and his forefathers' religion, and one who has no dissimulation has no religion. TABRISI, d. 548: Dissimulation is God's shield on earth, because the believing man from Pharaoh's family would have been killed had he openly declared Islam. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن العربي): Ibn al-Arabi says fear or dissimulation may prevent others hearing a profession, but cannot excuse omitting it before God; public hearing protects life and property, not validity. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He continually concealed his faith as protective dissimulation because disclosure would harm him without helping anyone; Ibn ʿAshur compares him with Socrates in Greece. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (أبو عبد الله عليه السلام): In al-Majmaʿ, Imam al-Ṣādiq says taqiyya is his and his fathers’ religion, indispensable to religion and God’s shield on earth; the believer would have been killed had he disclosed Islam. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Tabatabai says Shia reports on taqiyya are numerous and cites Qur’anic allowances for fearing hostile people and for a coerced believer. | mentions 3:28, 16:106"}, {"id": "40:28/q12/p2", "position": "Concealment must end when faith faces decisive danger", "reasons": "ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Concealing faith for religious benefit may be permissible, but becomes hypocrisy once religion faces decisive danger; the believer spoke openly when Moses’ life was threatened."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q13", "question": "Does inward belief require spoken profession?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q13/p1", "position": "Inward intention and spoken profession have distinct legal effects", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (مالك): Malik's analogy is that a husband's inward intention to divorce his wife takes effect, just as belief and disbelief may reside in the heart. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن العربي): Ibn al-Arabi says intending disbelief makes one an unbeliever without speech, but intending faith alone never makes one a believer until it is professed."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q14", "question": "Whom does the man address and whose killing does he challenge?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q14/p1", "position": "They contemplated killing Moses", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says baʿḍ, 'some,' means the whole: if they kill Moses while he is truthful, all the threatened punishment will strike them. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (أهل التفسير): Āl can mean a man’s household and relatives by descent; the believer is Pharaoh’s kin, not an Israelite, explaining Pharaoh’s acceptance of his plea about Moses. | mentions 15:61, 54:34 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The man whom Pharaoh’s people consider killing for saying “My Lord is God” is identified as Moses. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The believer from Pharaoh’s family, including the man who warns Moses in the city, is identified as Ḥizqīl; another name given is Sharwān. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: As Pharaoh sought to kill Moses, the believing man from Pharaoh's people spoke up. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الأكثرون): Most commentators say the man believed in Moses when Moses came. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the man believed before Moses came, as did Pharaoh's wife. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The believer alludes that God guided Moses to manifest miracles, and one so guided cannot be a profligate liar; this indirectly exalts Moses and denies that he lies. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Alternatively, the phrase may describe Pharaoh as profligate in resolving to kill Moses and lying by claiming divinity; God will frustrate and destroy his power. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): Al-Suddi says he was Pharaoh's cousin and the man who escaped with Moses, explaining why he is called one of Pharaoh's people. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (مقاتل): Muqatil identifies him with the man who came running from the farthest part of the city to warn Moses at 28:20. | mentions 28:20 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Pharaoh's household had no believer besides this man, Pharaoh's wife, and the believer who warned Moses that the council planned to kill him. | mentions 28:20 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari permits an omitted وقت before أن يقول, meaning they would kill Moses immediately upon hearing his words without reflection; Abu Hayyan rejects  IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (قيل): An unspecified view identifies the believing man as the person who escaped with Moses. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarīr preferred that the man was a Copt from Pharaoh's family and rejected the Israelite identification, since Pharaoh listened to him and stopped short of killing Moses. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says only this man, Pharaoh's wife, and the person who warned Moses that the chiefs planned to kill him believed among Pharaoh's household; Ibn Abī Ḥātim transmitted it via Ibn Jurayj. | mentions 28:20 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He objects that they would kill Moses merely for repeatedly saying his Lord is God, though God has already sent him clear, unambiguous signs. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The man is complete in manhood and firmly believes the message Moses brought. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He conceals his faith intensely from fear, using indirect counsel to stop them from killing Moses; a lone dissenter from a tribe is more vulnerable than someone among 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
