<<chunk 193, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "40:28/q03", "question": "Which group did the believing man belong to?", "turns_on": "Whether min āli Firʿawn gives kinship, ethnic or court affiliation, or instead belongs with 'conceals'.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q03/p1", "position": "He belonged to Pharaoh's household or kin", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (مقاتل والسدي): Muqātil and al-Suddī say the believer was an Egyptian, Pharaoh's cousin, and the man described in Q 28:20. | mentions 28:20 KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: The phrase may describe the man or attach to يكتم, meaning that he concealed his faith from Pharaoh’s family. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (مقاتل): Muqatil says the believer was Pharaoh’s paternal cousin. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (السدي وغيره): Al-Suddi and others say the believer belonged to Pharaoh’s family and concealed his faith; on this reading, the clause is an adjective without inversion. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (سيبويه؛ المبرد؛ أبو علي الفارسي): They offer different accounts of the dropped nūn in yak: Sibawayh treats it as lightening; al-Mubarrad compares it to the nūn of second-person plurals and duals; Abu Ali compares it to final weak letters after jussive marking. TABRISI, d. 548: Dissimulation is God's shield on earth, because the believing man from Pharaoh's family would have been killed had he openly declared Islam. TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the only other believers in Pharaoh's family were Pharaoh's wife and the believer who warned Moses that the council planned to kill him. | mentions 28:20 TABRISI, d. 548 (السدي ومقاتل): Al-Suddī and Muqātil say he was Pharaoh's cousin who believed in Moses and was the man who came running from the farthest part of the city. | mentions 28:20 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (شيخنا علي بن عبيد الله): ʿAlī ibn ʿUbayd Allāh defines āl as anyone referring to a relied-upon person or thing, by kinship or cause; its root carries return or becoming. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 (بعض المفسرين): The believer from Pharaoh’s family, including the man who warns Moses in the city, is identified as Ḥizqīl; another name given is Sharwān. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: The phrase means “because he says, ‘My Lord is God’” and is a rebuking rhetorical question. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (السدي ومقاتل): One meaning of āl is family and lineage; al-Suddi and Muqatil say the believer was Pharaoh's cousin, identified with the man at 28:20. | mentions 28:20 RAZI-FULL, d. 606: After Moses responds to Pharaoh's plot only by seeking God's protection, God raises a separate person to defend him and calm the crisis. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (قيل): One reported identification says the believer was Pharaoh's cousin, effectively a crown prince and chief of police. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Razi judges the first identification likelier because “āl” can mean kin and clan, citing the household of Lot in 54:34. | mentions 54:34 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (رسول الله): A report from the Prophet names three foremost believers: Ḥabīb al-Najjār, the believer from Pharaoh's household, and ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, whom it calls the best of them; Razi gives no grading. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (جعفر بن محمد): Jaʿfar ibn Muḥammad says Abū Bakr was better than the believer from Pharaoh's household: Abū Bakr proclaimed faith openly, while that believer concealed it. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: “Min” may modify “believer,” making the man a member of Pharaoh's household. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: An objection asks why the believer says “some” of what Moses promises: soothsayers may partly predict events, but a prophet speaking revelation should be wholly truthful. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): One view says Moses warned of several kinds of torment, each deadly, so suffering any part meant a fatal threat. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: The believer's standing with Pharaoh explains why Pharaoh did not harm him. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن وغيره): Al-Hasan and others say the believer was a Copt; al-Suddi says he was Pharaoh's cousin and escaped with Moses. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): Al-Suddi says he was Pharaoh's cousin and the man who escaped with Moses, explaining why he is called one of Pharaoh's people. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says Pharaoh's household had no believer besides this man, Pharaoh's wife, and the believer who warned Moses that the council planned to kill him. | mentions 28:20 BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The question means, Are you deliberately seeking to kill a man? NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): One account makes the believer a Copt and Pharaoh's cousin who secretly believed in Moses; Nasafi says this first account is the apparent one. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The believer may be speaking diplomatically: an extravagant liar would be abandoned and destroyed by Allah, freeing the people from him; or Allah would not grant him prophethood and support him with proofs. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The phrase means “because he says”; the believer condemns killing a protected person when the only alleged offense is speaking the truth that Allah is his Lord—and theirs too. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: An extravagant person has exceeded the proper limit; “liar” here means one making a false claim. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Asking whether they will kill a man merely for saying his Lord is God is a forceful rebuke: their only basis for killing him is his truthful statement, despite proofs from their own Lord. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Al-Zamakhshari challenges the claim that some means all; Abu Hayyan cites al-Mazani rebuking that interpretation. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The apparent parse makes من آل فرعون an omitted adjectival phrase describing رجل; the ordering noun, nearby prepositional phrase, then clause is especially apt and implies he was from Pharaoh's family. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The well-known view is that the believing man was a Copt from Pharaoh's household. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (السدي): Al-Suddī says the believing man was Pharaoh's cousin. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says only this man, Pharaoh's wife, and the person who warned Moses that the chiefs planned to kill him believed among Pharaoh's household; Ibn Abī Ḥātim transmitted it via Ibn Jurayj. | mentions 28:20 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The believer's plea for restraint resembles Moses asking Pharaoh's people for a truce and permission to preach; Moses says to leave him alone if they will not believe. | mentions 44:17, 44:18, 44:19, 44:20, 44:21 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The Prophet similarly asked Quraysh not to harm him and to preserve their kinship; Ibn Kathīr reads the request as enabling him to call people and connects it to the Hudaybiyyah truce and its clear victory. | mentions 42:23 BURHAN, d. 794: The believer from Pharaoh's family uses the same tactic, letting the opponent enter through its less threatening possibility. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He belongs to Pharaoh's elite and leading household, a place from which he can advise while remaining among hostile people. BURSEVI, d. 1127: مؤمن is the first of three descriptions of the man because it is noblest; من آل فرعون comes before يكتم إيمانه to prevent misreading it as the man’s relative clause. BURSEVI, d. 1127: A person’s آل are those whose affairs return to him through kinship, companionship, or agreement in religion. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The believer was a relative, specifically a cousin, of Pharaoh and the same person who had warned Moses of the plot in 28:20; Bursevī considers Shamaʿān the soundest reported name. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Another parse attaches min āli Firʿawn to concealing his faith, restricting the concealed believer to Pharaoh’s household rather than Moses’ followers; stopping after believer is then possible. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The more apparent parse makes the phrase a second adjective of the man and takes his descent from Pharaoh’s family literally. ELMALILI, d. 1361: The apparent meaning of being from Pharaoh’s household points instead to an Egyptian, perhaps a member of Pharaoh’s own dynasty. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Süddî): Al-Suddī relates that the believer was Pharaoh’s cousin. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Another reported identification makes the believer heir apparent and head of the police. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The question is directed to Pharaoh, who ordered the killing; the next statement identifies him as speaking without a coordinating waw (40:29). | mentions 40:29 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ibn ʿAshur considers him most likely a relative or close associate of Pharaoh, as آل naturally or figuratively suggests. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: When ʿUqba ibn Abi Muʿayṭ strangled the Prophet at the Kaʿba, Abu Bakr intervened and pushed him away, invoking the believer’s words. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (علي بن أبي طالب): ʿAli said Abu Bakr’s day was better than the believer from Pharaoh’s household: the believer hid faith, while Abu Bakr openly risked his wealth and life. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (قيل): A reported parse makes “from Pharaoh’s household” the second object of “conceals,” placed before the verb. TABATABAI, d. 1402: His repeated address to Pharaoh and his people as “my people” confirms that he belonged to them. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The context makes “from Pharaoh’s household” and “concealing his faith” two descriptions: he is a Copt in Pharaoh’s inner circle, whose faith they do not know. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The clause explains only the truthful-Moses case: the people then transgress by denying their Lord and taking other lords. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The Moses–Pharaoh account warns Quraysh, encourages Muhammad and his companions to endure trials until victory, and profiles a Pharaoh’s family believer as a lesson for Quraysh and hesitant sympathizers. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The believer belonged to Pharaoh’s royal family, loved truth, and had sympathized with Moses’ reform before prophethood; after Moses killed a Copt, he warned Moses and urged his escape to Madyan. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Had he declared faith earlier, Pharaoh could have publicly disgraced him as a national rebel and stripped him of his royal standing. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Zamakhshari and Razi report that the believer from Phara
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
