<<chunk 194, part 2 of 0..5>>
rns to a place he has left. BURHAN, d. 794 (ثعلب): Tha‘lab says some of the warning means the worldly punishment, one part of a threat that also includes punishment in the afterlife; it does not deny the latter. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: He still gives the truthful case its due, balancing fairness with the false case and stating that even some threatened consequence is enough to prove the danger. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Saying 'some of what he promises' is measured fairness: acceptance brings all promised good, rejection brings all the threatened evil, but even a part is enough as a warning; the verse uses ellipsis between the two cases. ITQAN, d. 911 (ثعلب): Thaʿlab reads some literally: the threatened worldly punishment may befall them as one part of the threat, without excluding punishment in the afterlife. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Even a partial fulfillment of Moses’ warning would be dangerous; warning against a part implies that the whole would be worse, while also sounding fair-minded. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda allows baʿḍ to mean all and cites Labid’s verse; al-Ālūsī notes that the verse is better read literally as referring to the death of one’s own self. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari sharply criticizes Abu ʿUbayda’s interpretation if the report attributing it to him is sound. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj keeps baʿḍ in its ordinary sense: the believer establishes an unanswerable proof and shows the merit of deliberation over haste. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The maxim that baʿḍ can mean all is not established by the cited poetry; in Labid’s line, some souls means the speaker himself, so the ordinary partitive meaning remains. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: A second poetic citation is offered for using baʿḍ to mean all, but al-Ālūsī says the wording does not require that sense. ELMALILI, d. 1361: If Moses is truthful, at least some of his threatened punishment will befall them, even in this world if they reject the afterlife. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The believer argues from the least threatening case: even part of the promised punishment suffices, although Moses’ truth entails all of it. ZAJJAJ: some is least consequence without denying all prophet promise ZAJJAJ: poet some need illustrates least argument"}, {"id": "40:28/q26/p2", "position": "'Some' means all", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538 (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda interprets بعض as meaning all and cites a line by Labīd as evidence; its text is not included in this segment. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (أبو عبيدة وغيره): Abu Ubayda and others take baʿḍ as “all” and cite al-Qutami’s verse as evidence. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (القطامي عمرو بن شييم): Al-Qutami’s line is cited in support of interpreting “some” as “all.” TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Some can idiomatically mean all as a tactful or expansive expression; the cited poem says the patient may attain some of his wish while the hasty may err. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda says baʿḍ can mean “all,” adducing a line by Labid in which “some souls” means all souls. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda says “some” may mean “all,” citing Labīd's verse about death catching up with some souls. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (لبيد): Labid's line uses baʿḍ in the sense of all, offered as evidence for Abu Ubayda's interpretation. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الماوردي): Al-Mawardi says baʿḍ may stand for all as tactful, expansive speech; he cites a line about patience attaining some wishes and haste leading to error. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda says baʿḍ can mean all: if any threatened punishment reaches them, the full threat encompasses them; this softens admonition. ITQAN, d. 911 (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda takes some in these phrases to mean all. ITQAN, d. 911 (الزركشي): Al-Zarkashi supports the literal partial-threat reading: an entire threat may be left unfulfilled, so its partial fulfillment is unproblematic; 40:77 offers a parallel. | mentions 40:77 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (عمرو القطامي): The patient person’s attaining some need is cited in discussion of whether baʿḍ means all; al-Ālūsī treats the line as supporting the literal-part reading. THALABI: some means all idiom THALABI: Labid some souls all evidence MAWARDI-FULL: some all tactful idiom poet WAHIDI-WAJIZ: some means all"}, {"id": "40:28/q26/p3", "position": "Worldly punishment is one part of worldly and afterlife threats", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): Another group takes “some” as the punishment of this world, one portion of the punishment in the afterlife; even that portion suffices to destroy them. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): Another explanation says his warnings included different events, such as destruction in this world and punishment in the next; earthly destruction is part of the warning. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الماوردي): Al-Mawardi's other explanation is that worldly destruction is only part of the promised punishment, which also includes the afterlife. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Moses threatened worldly and afterlife punishment; the arrival of worldly punishment would count as some of what he promised. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another view says Moses threatened worldly or afterlife punishment for disbelief, so the phrase means one of the two punishments would reach them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another explanation takes the phrase as some warning fulfilled in this world, with more punishment following in the afterlife. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: Nasafi rejects interpreting “some” as “all”; rather, it may be the immediate worldly punishment, while Moses had promised punishment in this world and the next. BURHAN, d. 794 (ثعلب): Tha‘lab says some of the warning means the worldly punishment, one part of a threat that also includes punishment in the afterlife; it does not deny the latter. BURHAN, d. 794: People may accept that an entire threat is not carried out, so they have still less reason to object to only part of it; the sura’s later promise to show only part before death supports Tha‘lab’s reading. ITQAN, d. 911 (ثعلب): Thaʿlab reads some literally: the threatened worldly punishment may befall them as one part of the threat, without excluding punishment in the afterlife. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: One view takes the part as a worldly punishment, one of Moses’ promised punishments and the one more plausibly expected by Pharaoh’s people. ELMALILI, d. 1361: If Moses is truthful, at least some of his threatened punishment will befall them, even in this world if they reject the afterlife. MAWARDI-FULL: worldly destruction part of hereafter warning"}, {"id": "40:28/q26/p4", "position": "Punishment is one of two promised outcomes", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542: Ibn Atiyya reads it as one part of the promise: Moses promised reward for belief and punishment for unbelief, so punishment is one part of what he promised. TABRISI, d. 548 (قيل): One explanation says Moses promised rescue for belief and destruction for disbelief; whichever course they chose, one of his promised outcomes would reach them. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الماوردي): Al-Mawardi preserves the literal “some”: the warning covers either rescue for belief or destruction for disbelief, so one outcome is only part of the alternatives. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): A further view says Moses promised punishment for disbelief and reward for belief; by disbelieving, they would incur part of what he promised. MAWARDI-FULL: some one of rescue or destruction"}, {"id": "40:28/q26/p5", "position": "'Some' is an additional particle", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (الليث): Al-Layth treats baʿḍ as an additional particle, so the sense is that what Moses promises will strike them. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الليث): Al-Layth says baʿḍ is an expletive here, so the sense is that what Moses threatens will befall them."}, {"id": "40:28/q26/p6", "position": "An initial punishment or portent is one part of a sequence", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: If Moses is truthful, some of his threatened calamities will strike and establish his truth; the wording says some because initial portents may persuade them, while persistence in defiance brings all the threats a fortiori. MAWARDI-FULL: first punishment begins successive stages"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q27", "question": "What does yaʿidukum denote here?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q27/p1", "position": "The promise is a threat of punishment", "reasons": "JISHUMI, d. 494: God's freedom from evil entails His truthfulness and the validity of His promise and threat. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Some means some of the worldly punishment Moses promised, a portion of his threats and the more plausible outcome for the audience. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Saying 'some of what he promises' is measured fairness: acceptance brings all promised good, rejection brings all the threatened evil, but even a part is enough as a warning; the verse uses ellipsis between the two cases. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Here promise means a threat, that is, a warning of evil; if they persist in defiance, all that he threatened will strike them a fortiori."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q28", "question": "Why is the lying case stated first?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q28/p1", "position": "The lying case comes first to disarm the hearers", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: By granting only part on the surface, the believer appears to understate Moses’ claim rather than defend him, although his premise that Moses is truthful entails the whole warning; putting the liar first serves the same tact. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: Putting the liar's case before the truthful one's is another instance of tactful persuasion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (صاحب التحرير والتحبير): The author of al-Tahrir wa-l-Tahbir calls the believer's subtle advocacy استدراج: he avoids naming Moses as a believer or prophet, begins with the audience's assumption that he may be lying, then implies the liar-description fits Pharaoh instead. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The believer continues his tactful argument by first c
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
