<<chunk 194, part 3 of 0..5>>
onceding the audience's view, then conditionally raising Moses' truth without appearing a partisan; his closing description indirectly characterizes Pharaoh as an excessive liar. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The believer presents the possibility that Moses is false first because it best dispels suspicion; his lie would harm him alone, not the hearers. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The liar is persistently excessive in lying; plunging into falsehood is the first sign of being abandoned by guidance. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He mentions the possibility of lying first to distance himself from the impression that he is defending Moses and to appear initially concerned for his people."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q29", "question": "Who speaks the final sentence and to whom does it apply?", "turns_on": "Whether the sentence continues the believer's conditional counsel or is God's comment, and whether Moses or Pharaoh is meant.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q29/p1", "position": "The phrase points indirectly to Pharaoh", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: The phrase may describe the man or attach to يكتم, meaning that he concealed his faith from Pharaoh’s family. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): Another group says he was an Israelite, with the phrase reordered to mean a man concealing his faith who was from Pharaoh’s people. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Alternatively, the phrase may describe Pharaoh as profligate in resolving to kill Moses and lying by claiming divinity; God will frustrate and destroy his power. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The believer likely intended the first argument while suggesting the second to soften their resistance; he also hints that Pharaoh is the extravagant liar whom God will not guide. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): An alternative says he insinuated that Moses was meant by “extravagant liar,” while intending Pharaoh. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Calling Moses an immoderate liar indirectly rejects the charge against him, since a prophet chosen by God cannot be such, while branding Pharaoh excessive in killing and false in claiming divinity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The believer continues his tactful argument by first conceding the audience's view, then conditionally raising Moses' truth without appearing a partisan; his closing description indirectly characterizes Pharaoh as an excessive liar. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The apparent parse makes من آل فرعون an omitted adjectival phrase describing رجل; the ordering noun, nearby prepositional phrase, then clause is especially apt and implies he was from Pharaoh's family. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The more apparent parse makes the phrase a second adjective of the man and takes his descent from Pharaoh’s family literally. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The man probably intends the first argument but hints at the second to soften his hearers; he indirectly calls Pharaoh extravagant in killing and corruption and a liar in claiming divinity. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Both arguments indirectly target Pharaoh: as a blood-shedding profligate liar, God will not help him kill Moses, and Pharaoh will only bring harm on himself. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Pharaoh’s claim that he only shows what he sees suggests the believer’s words seemed justified to others, or at least raised doubts about whether killing Moses was right. STUDYQURAN (IJ, Ṭ): Others say he was an Israelite, reading the phrase as a believer concealing his faith from Pharaoh’s family."}, {"id": "40:28/q29/p2", "position": "The believer speaks it conditionally about Moses", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (عبد الله بن عمرو بن العاص): Ibn ʿAmr told ʿUrwa that the worst assault on the Prophet was when ʿUqba ibn Abī Muʿayṭ choked him at the Kaʿba; Abū Bakr intervened and quoted the believer's words. No grading is stated. TABRISI, d. 548: The sentence may continue the believer's words, or it may begin a new statement from God. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Alternatively, the phrase may describe Pharaoh as profligate in resolving to kill Moses and lying by claiming divinity; God will frustrate and destroy his power. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The believer's phrase “my Lord is God” points to monotheism, while “clear proofs” refers to evidence for it, including Moses' statements in 20:50 and 26:24. | mentions 20:50, 26:24 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Calling Moses an immoderate liar indirectly rejects the charge against him, since a prophet chosen by God cannot be such, while branding Pharaoh excessive in killing and false in claiming divinity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: A hadith recounts Abu Bakr defending the Prophet at the Kaaba against Quraysh's threat, loudly repeating the believer's words with tears until they released him; Ja'far al-Sadiq says the believer spoke secretly while Abu Bakr spoke openly. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The believer continues his tactful argument by first conceding the audience's view, then conditionally raising Moses' truth without appearing a partisan; his closing description indirectly characterizes Pharaoh as an excessive liar. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Both arguments indirectly target Pharaoh: as a blood-shedding profligate liar, God will not help him kill Moses, and Pharaoh will only bring harm on himself. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: When ʿUqba ibn Abi Muʿayṭ strangled the Prophet at the Kaʿba, Abu Bakr intervened and pushed him away, invoking the believer’s words. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Pharaoh’s claim that he only shows what he sees suggests the believer’s words seemed justified to others, or at least raised doubts about whether killing Moses was right. MAWARDI-FULL: clause points Moses if believer speaking"}, {"id": "40:28/q29/p3", "position": "It is God's parenthetical statement", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548: The sentence may continue the believer's words, or it may begin a new statement from God. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Alternatively, the sentence is God’s parenthetical commendation of the believer: denying guidance to an excessive liar implies this righteous man speaks from guidance and truth. MAWARDI-FULL: clause points Pharaoh if God narrating"}]}
{"id": "40:28/q30", "question": "What does musrif mean here?", "turns_on": "Whether the excess is shirk, bloodshed, self ruin, or transgression generally.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q30/p1", "position": "Excessive or unjust killing", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (السدي): Al-Suddi says the profligacy is excessive killing. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (مجاهد): Mujahid takes “profligate” to mean one who sheds blood. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Alternatively, the phrase may describe Pharaoh as profligate in resolving to kill Moses and lying by claiming divinity; God will frustrate and destroy his power. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Calling Moses an immoderate liar indirectly rejects the charge against him, since a prophet chosen by God cannot be such, while branding Pharaoh excessive in killing and false in claiming divinity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (السدي): Al-Suddi interprets excess as excessive killing; Qatada interprets it as disbelief. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The believer’s final argument has two readings: if Moses were an extravagant liar, God would not guide him to proofs and support him with miracles; or God would abandon and destroy him, leaving no need to kill him. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The man probably intends the first argument but hints at the second to soften his hearers; he indirectly calls Pharaoh extravagant in killing and corruption and a liar in claiming divinity. ELMALILI, d. 1361: The other inference is that a truly profligate liar would not succeed, so there is no need to strive to kill him. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Both arguments indirectly target Pharaoh: as a blood-shedding profligate liar, God will not help him kill Moses, and Pharaoh will only bring harm on himself. TAB-FULL: Suddi musrif unjust bloodshed; also polytheism THALABI: Suddi musrif killer"}, {"id": "40:28/q30/p2", "position": "Polytheism or disbelief", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (قتادة): Qatada says the profligacy is unbelief. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (قتادة): Qatada takes “profligate” to mean a polytheist. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (السدي): Al-Suddi interprets excess as excessive killing; Qatada interprets it as disbelief. STUDYQURAN (Ṭ): Here “prodigal” can mean “idolater.” MUQATIL: extravagant liar is polytheist and fabricator TAB-FULL: Qatada musrif shirk and self injury TAB-FULL: Suddi musrif unjust bloodshed; also polytheism THALABI: musrif associator and liar God"}, {"id": "40:28/q30/p3", "position": "Exceeding rightful bounds generally", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: An extravagant person has exceeded the proper limit; “liar” here means one making a false claim. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The believer's description of the transgressor and liar chiefly fits Pharaoh, distancing the speaker from him, though it could also be applied to Moses as Pharaoh alleges. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: An overreacher is one who exceeds bounds by promoting corruption. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Musرف means one who exceeds what is proper; here the excess is lying against God, the greatest lie, as 6:93 states. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The clause explains only the truthful-Moses case: the people then transgress by denying their Lord and taking other lords. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: God does not guide here means He will not let a liar and transgressor succeed; this apparently wise principle also sarcastically targets Pharaoh in front of his court. STUDYQURAN (Ṭs): It can also mean one who transgresses God’s limits by lying about God. | mentions 10:12 TAB-FULL: musrif transgresses without right and lies about God"}, {"id": "40:28/q30/p4", "position": "Wasting or wronging oneself", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (المؤمن): If the believer speaks these words, the wasteful one is Moses's opponent to himself and a liar against his Lord. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Both arguments indirectly target Pharaoh: as a blood-shedding profligate liar, God will not help him kill Moses, and Pharaoh will only bring harm on himself. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412: Asad renders musrif as one who wastes his own self, drawing on his note 21 on 10:12. | mentions 10:12 TAB
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
