<<chunk 194, part 1 of 0..5>>
o there is no need to kill him to avert it. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The believer argues by exhaustive division: if Moses lies, the harm and burden of his lie fall on him alone. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: God guides the moderate and truthful; if Moses lies, his lie harms him and he finds no escape, while if he is truthful, their wrongdoing leaves them unable to find rescue from punishment. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The cautious believer says that if Moses lies, the burden of his lie falls on him and there is no need to kill him to avert it. ELMALILI, d. 1361: If Moses is lying, the lie and its consequence fall on him, so there is no need to kill him before his falsehood is established. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He urges them to inspect Moses’s signs rather than kill or follow him hastily: if his claims and warnings fail, the lie harms and brands Moses alone. TABATABAI, d. 1402: If Moses lies, his lie is enough to condemn him; the supposed lord he follows has no real lordship relevant to guidance. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: If Moses lies, the consequences fall on him; if he speaks truth, some threatened punishment will strike them, following God’s established treatment of rejecters and would-be killers of messengers. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The conditional if he is lying reflects the audience’s supposed view, not genuine uncertainty; context and occasion determine whether a conditional conveys doubt. STUDYQURAN: If Moses lies, he bears the consequences of his lie, so there is no need to punish him. ZAJJAJ: liar harm himself not opponents"}, {"id": "40:28/q23/p2", "position": "An objection says a false claimant can harm others", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606: Razi answers the objections together: killing is unnecessary; they can stop Moses from publicly preaching and leave him alive, so a liar's harm stays with him while a truthful man's message can benefit them. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: An objection says a liar's harm would spread beyond himself because followers might adopt his false religion and provoke conflict. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (العلماء): Razi says scholars unanimously hold that a heretic who calls people to his heresy should be killed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: A second objection says that if this reasoning were sound, every liar could use it to defend a false religion. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: A third objection says the reasoning would also forbid rejecting opponents of Moses: if their denial were false, its burden would be theirs, and if true, others could benefit."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q24", "question": "Why is the nūn absent from yak?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q24/p1", "position": "The nūn is dropped for lightness or because of inflection", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (سيبويه؛ المبرد؛ أبو علي الفارسي): They offer different accounts of the dropped nūn in yak: Sibawayh treats it as lightening; al-Mubarrad compares it to the nūn of second-person plurals and duals; Abu Ali compares it to final weak letters after jussive marking. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains the dropped n in yakun as due to frequent use; al-Abbas instead treats it as the inflectional n. NAHHAS: Sibawayh nūn dropped frequency; Abu Abbas inflectional nūn"}, {"id": "40:28/q24/p2", "position": "Its deletion compresses urgent speech", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The nūn is deleted from both instances of yakun to compress the warning under extreme pressure: the believer faces three dangers, including exposure of his faith."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q25", "question": "What follows if Moses is truthful?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q25/p1", "position": "Some threatened punishment would strike them", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516: If Moses is truthful and they reject him, some of what he threatens will reach them. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says baʿḍ, 'some,' means the whole: if they kill Moses while he is truthful, all the threatened punishment will strike them. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: The believer sets up a dilemma: if Moses lies, the harm of his lie stays with him; if he is truthful, some promised harm will reach them if they attack him. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: “Some” is a fair minimum: if Moses lies, the harm is his; if he is truthful, at least some warning reaches them, which presents the case without obstinacy. | mentions 34:24 RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The believer offers a dilemma: if Moses lies, the burden of his lie is on him; if he is truthful, some promised punishment will reach them, so either way they should leave him alive. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: If Moses is truthful, some of the threatened punishment will reach them; saying “some” rather than “all” is diplomatic fairness designed to make acceptance easier, without denying that all might happen. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The believer reasons that Moses has brought proof, then argues that even if he is a liar, leaving him alone lets God punish him; if he is truthful, harming him risks some of the promised punishment, so restraint is prudent. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: God guides the moderate and truthful; if Moses lies, his lie harms him and he finds no escape, while if he is truthful, their wrongdoing leaves them unable to find rescue from punishment. ELMALILI, d. 1361: If Moses is truthful, at least some of his threatened punishment will befall them, even in this world if they reject the afterlife. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: If Moses is truthful, some of his threatened calamities will strike and establish his truth; the wording says some because initial portents may persuade them, while persistence in defiance brings all the threats a fortiori. STUDYQURAN: The believer argues that truthful speech, especially backed by evidentiary miracles, cannot merit punishment. STUDYQURAN: Punishing Moses if he is truthful will bring even greater afflictions on his punishers."}]}
{"id": "40:28/q26", "question": "What does 'some of what he promises' mean?", "turns_on": "Whether baʿḍ retains partitive force, means all, or is additional; its poetry proofs and the scope of Moses' warnings decide.", "positions": [{"id": "40:28/q26/p1", "position": "Any portion is enough to establish the danger", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says baʿḍ, 'some,' means the whole: if they kill Moses while he is truthful, all the threatened punishment will strike them. BAGHAWI-FULL, d. 516 (أهل المعاني): The rhetoricians retain the ordinary sense 'some': even a portion of the threatened punishment would mean their destruction, so mention of a part establishes the whole. KASHSHAF-FULL, d. 538: Though a truthful prophet’s full warning must come to pass, the speaker says only some to conciliate Moses’ opponents and sound fair, increasing the chance they will listen and accept his point. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): Another group takes “some” as the punishment of this world, one portion of the punishment in the afterlife; even that portion suffices to destroy them. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the wording establishes the proof through the least that could happen, without denying that all of it may happen. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): One group means some of the promised torment, which by itself would suffice to destroy them. TABRISI, d. 548 (علي بن عيسى): ʿAlī ibn ʿĪsā says the believer argues that even part of Moses' warning suffices to destroy them, so the whole warning is more than enough. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الماوردي): Al-Mawardi preserves the literal “some”: the warning covers either rescue for belief or destruction for disbelief, so one outcome is only part of the alternatives. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the believer argues from the least concession, which establishes his case without denying that the full threat may occur. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: The proverb about a patient person attaining some need while a hasty person may err shows the force of an opponent-proof minimum claim. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj explains that mentioning a part entails the whole because a part belongs to the whole; conceding only that some threat will come still establishes danger. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597: In Labid's cited verse, “some souls” means the poet himself alone. RAZI-FULL, d. 606: “Some” is a fair minimum: if Moses lies, the harm is his; if he is truthful, at least some warning reaches them, which presents the case without obstinacy. | mentions 34:24 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (الجمهور): The majority rejects Abū ʿUbayda's usage as mistaken, saying Labīd meant himself by “some souls.” RAZI-FULL, d. 606: The believer offers a dilemma: if Moses lies, the burden of his lie is on him; if he is truthful, some promised punishment will reach them, so either way they should leave him alive. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قيل): Another explanation takes the phrase as some warning fulfilled in this world, with more punishment following in the afterlife. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: At least part of the threatened punishment will befall them; warning them with a limited share is rhetorically forceful and displays fairness rather than bias. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Interpreting some as all by appeal to Labīd's verse is rejected: Labīd meant himself by some of the souls. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: A poem says a careful person may attain part of a need while a hurried person may err, illustrating the rhetorical use of some. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Al-Zamakhshari says the believer accepts Moses truth conditionally, then says some to understate its force and avoid appearing partisan. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Some is partitive: the believer understates Moses's due in order to seem impartial rather than zealously partisan. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Some others take بعض to mean all, citing lines by Labid, ʿAmr ibn Shuyaym, and an unnamed poet; the author says the last two do not prove this, while Labid's line offers some evidence because death comes to everyone. BURHAN, d. 794: The author says Tha‘lab misread the cited poem: its “some souls” means the speaker himself, one soul among many, and the line means he never retu
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
