<<chunk 206, part 3 of 0..5>>
 {"id": "53:42/q03/p2", "position": "It is a verbal noun meaning ending, in a faʿlā pattern that can function as a noun.", "reasons": "Al-Nasafi and al-Tabatabai call it a verbal or infinitive noun; al-Tabatabai draws breadth from its unrestricted use. Al-Burhan gives al-shura, al-rujʿa, and al-ʿulya as parallels for faʿlā as a noun."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q04", "question": "What does al-muntaha mean lexically?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q04/p1", "position": "The end, endpoint, termination, or final return; it can be the destination where action stops.", "reasons": "Al-Wahidi explicitly glosses it as endpoint or termination; al-Kashshaf as the end; al-Nasafi as a verbal noun for the end where creatures arrive and return, citing 3:28. Al-Jishumi adds the destination at which action ceases. Al-Bursevi glosses it as end or return. Al-Tabatabai calls it an infinitive noun and takes its unrestricted wording to include every kind of ending."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q05", "question": "What does the definite article in al-muntaha specify?", "turns_on": "Al-Razi ties the article's reference to whether 'your' addresses people generally or the Prophet.", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q05/p1", "position": "For a general addressee it identifies the already promised return.", "reasons": "Al-Razi says revelation and the Prophet have previously announced this return."}, {"id": "53:42/q05/p2", "position": "For the Prophet as addressee it is generic, encompassing every terminus.", "reasons": "Al-Razi says every terminus goes to the Lord who is its origin; in the corresponding account perception starts from outward things and through reflection reaches God and stops."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q06", "question": "What ultimately ends with the Lord?", "turns_on": "The notes dispute whether the unrestricted 'ending' denotes bodily return, final outcomes, hopes, the limit of thought, causal explanation, or all kinds of ending; al-Tabatabai argues against restricting its scope.", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q06/p1", "position": "Creatures return to God after death or at resurrection for judgment and recompense.", "reasons": "Al-Nahhas, al-Thaʿlabi, al-Baghawi, al-Qurtubi, and others add recompense for good and bad deeds; al-Wahidi calls this the exegetes' interpretation. Ibn ʿAtiyya calls it the gathering and destination after death, relative to worldly life. Al-Razi calls resurrection the well-known interpretation and says it answers when the prior recompense occurs: gratitude is rewarded and ingratitude punished. Al-Kashshaf cites 35:18; al-Nasafi cites 3:28. Ibn Kathir specifies Judgment Day, Study Quran says all then stand before God, and al-Alusi says no other being has an independent or shared part in their return. Al-Bursevi cites 42:53 and says beginning and end are in God. Al-Biqai includes bodily resurrection and the return of deeds; Elmalili includes full recompense and calls God First and Last. Islahi says no one can evade accountability by appealing to another and God's decisions are final. Kuranyolu says judgment gives full recompense without the slightest injustice, while grace and forgiveness remain God's choice and believers should hope without complacency. Al-Tabatabai rejects making this the only meaning as too narrow."}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p2", "position": "The ultimate destination is specifically God's reckoning, reward in Paradise, or punishment in Hell, where earthly action ends.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAtiyya contrasts Paradise or Hell as the absolute endpoint with the postmortem gathering relative to worldly life, and posits an omitted genitive: the end of God's mercy or punishment. Al-Tabrisi names divine reward and punishment where deeds cease; Ibn Kathir reports Muʿadh ibn Jabal saying the return ends in Paradise or Fire. Al-Alusi reports reckonings, Paradise, and Fire as commentators' glosses. Study Quran cites 13:35 for the Garden of the reverent versus the Fire of disbelievers. Al-Tabatabai rejects restriction to reward and punishment or reckoning as unsupported narrowing."}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p3", "position": "All beneficence begins with God and all hopes, or security, finally end with Him.", "reasons": "Al-Thaʿlabi and al-Baghawi report beneficence and hopes; al-Qurtubi has favor and security. Al-Jishumi lists grace and hopes among reported senses."}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p4", "position": "Human inquiry and thought reach their limit at God, whose essence and attributes cannot be encompassed.", "reasons": "Al-Wahidi permits reasoning about created things but says divine knowledge, essence, and modality elude comprehension. Al-Jishumi reports the limit of thought; al-Alusi applies it to divine essence and attributes. Reports from Ubayy, Anas, Abu Hurayra, Ibn Abbas, and Abu Dharr support stopping or turning to creation, detailed in the reflection question. Al-Razi interprets Ubayy's and Anas's reports as reaching the uncaused necessary existent; he says reflection from outward objects stops at God. Al-Tabatabai rejects making the limit of thought the verse's only sense, while treating the Imam al-Sadiq's instruction as an expanded application of 'ending.'"}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p5", "position": "All beings, their effects, governance, deeds, knowledge, hopes, and every other ending depend on God, their origin as well as final end.", "reasons": "Al-Tabatabai reads the unrestricted infinitive noun absolutely: God creates beings and their relations, directly or through causes, and all governance returns to Him; he cites 39:62–63 and 7:54. Al-Biqai includes bodily return and deeds, knowledge, hopes, affairs, place, and time. Asad includes the universe's beginning and end in time and space, God as source and goal. Bursevi cites 42:53 for affairs returning to God because there is no other deity. Al-Husayn's explanation of tawhid, transmitted by al-Sulami and Bursevi, says contingent effects arise from God, return to Him, and vanish while their cause remains; al-Sulami cites 'He is the First' in 57:3. Al-Razi reads the generic article as every terminus belonging to its origin."}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p6", "position": "The chain of causes and rational inquiry ends at God as the uncaused Necessary Being and source of existence.", "reasons": "Al-Razi argues contingent things require causes and an explanatory chain cannot finish with another contingent thing. He takes Ubayy's and Anas's stop-at-God reports in this sense. He warns that extending the same reading to every return or ascent verse, such as 35:10, lacks apparent support in some cases though it is clear here. Study Quran reports this understanding from R. Al-Jishumi mentions God as final judge among several reported views, distinct from the causal proof."}, {"id": "53:42/q06/p7", "position": "All knowledge ultimately ends with the Lord.", "reasons": "Muqatil states the epistemic endpoint without further argument."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q07", "question": "What guidance about contemplating God is drawn from the verse and its reports?", "turns_on": "Whether the transmitted prohibitions express the verse's whole sense or an application directed especially to those unready for difficult inquiry.", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q07/p1", "position": "Stop speculation about God Himself and reflect on His creation instead.", "reasons": "Ubayy ibn Kaʿb's Prophetic report is transmitted by al-Thaʿlabi, al-Wahidi, al-Baghawi, Ibn ʿAtiyya, al-Razi, al-Qurtubi, Ibn Kathir, al-Biqai, al-Durr, and al-Alusi; some explicitly give no grading. Anas or Sufyan al-Thawri transmit 'when the Lord is mentioned, stop.' Abu Hurayra, Ibn Abbas, and Abu Dharr transmit the creation-versus-Creator instruction because thought cannot encompass Him, with Abu Dharr warning of ruin. Al-Thaʿlabi's Abu Hurayra report describes layers of earth, heavens, and a sea in the seventh heaven. Ibn Kathir says the wording of Abu Hurayra's raised report is not preserved; he cites a sound Satanic-question hadith requiring refuge and stopping, and a Sunan report including an angel's three-hundred-year earlobe-to-shoulder distance. Al-Qurtubi also links the Satanic-question hadith and cites a poem directing thought from God's essence to His works. Al-Durr transmits Yunus ibn Maysara's account of the companions discussing God's greatness and the Prophet redirecting them, and a Kufa imam's report of reflection on the sun and a radiant western land inhabited by beings unaware whether Adam or Iblis was created. Al-Biqai adds Ibn Abbas's inability-to-grasp-God's-measure report. Imam al-Sadiq applies the verse to stopping speech when it reaches God. Imam al-Baqir warns Ziyad that forbidden disputation brings doubt, void deeds, and confusion, or wandering in a variant. Al-Wahidi specifies that divine knowledge, essence, and modality cannot be comprehended; al-Alusi says most transmitted proofs indicate the essence cannot be known in its full reality. Al-Jishumi gives no grading for the creation report."}, {"id": "53:42/q07/p2", "position": "The warning especially guides people unprepared for difficult rational inquiry; the stop-at-God report is an expanded application of 'ending.'", "reasons": "Al-Tabatabai says difficult speculation risks lasting ruin for such people, and interprets Imam al-Sadiq's instruction as a broader application rather than limiting the verse's entire meaning. He rejects making the thought-limit reading exclusive."}]}
{"id": "53:42/q08", "question": "How does the verse support God's existence?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "53:42/q08/p1", "position": "Reason's chain of contingent causes must end with God's necessary, uncaused existence.", "reasons": "Al-Razi says each contingent thing requires a cause, and another contingent thing cannot be the final explanatory terminus. He reads the reports against speculation about the Lord as the point where one reaches the uncaused necessary existent. He rejects indiscriminately transferring this explanation to every return or ascent verse, including 35:10, though he
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
