<<chunk 221, part 3 of 0..5>>
Tabrisī calls it an idiom, 'leave me and him'; Burhān illustrates the idiom by leaving a she-camel with her foal. Zajjāj, Wāḥidī, Ibn al-Jawzī, Damghānī and Samīn refer to the parallel at 73:11. Asad infers that humans must leave punishment of deniers to God. Qurʾan Yolu says the Prophet need not be involved. Samarrāʾī says the singular form can suit an individual punishment."}]}
{"id": "74:11/q02", "question": "How is 'and the one whom I created' construed?", "turns_on": "Whether waw coordinates objects or gives the idiomatic sense 'leave the man to Me'; the relative clause also contains an understood object.", "positions": [{"id": "74:11/q02/p1", "position": "The waw makes the person a comitative object: leave Me with the one I created.", "reasons": "Naḥḥās and Nasafī allow the comitative accusative. Burhān insists that the idiom means leaving the person to God, comparing 'I left the she-camel with her foal'; Samīn refers to the two analyses of the corresponding expression at 73:11."}, {"id": "74:11/q02/p2", "position": "The person is coordinated with the object pronoun of 'leave Me.'", "reasons": "Naḥḥās and Nasafī permit coordination; Abū al-Baqāʾ allows it. Burhān objects that this would order the Prophet to leave both God and the denier, obscuring the intended 'leave him to Me' sense."}, {"id": "74:11/q02/p3", "position": "The relative clause has an omitted object: 'the one whom I created.'", "reasons": "Wāḥidī supplies the object of khalaqtu; Ibn ʿĀshūr says the relative clause also folds the man's ingratitude into the warning."}]}
{"id": "74:11/q03", "question": "Who is 'the one whom I created'?", "turns_on": "Whether reports naming al-Walīd specify the sole occasion and target, or name an instance of a general description.", "positions": [{"id": "74:11/q03/p1", "position": "Al-Walīd ibn al-Mughīra al-Makhzūmī is the man meant.", "reasons": "Muqātil calls him uniquely prominent among his people. Ibn ʿAbbās also links him to 15:92; Ibn Zayd extends the subject through 74:26. Mujāhid says all humans begin alone though this concerns him. Saʿīd ibn Jubayr names him ibn Hishām and counts thirteen sons; Zajjāj and al-Qummī give ten. Māwardī and Qurṭubī say ingratitude and hostility singled him out. Ibn ʿAtiyya and Rāzī report exegetical agreement; Ibn ʿAtiyya doubts proof of the nickname report. Ibn ʿĀshūr names his son Khālid. The transmitted identification is repeated across the reports and later commentaries."}, {"id": "74:11/q03/p2", "position": "The wording addresses the general type of wealthy, arrogant denier, with al-Walīd as one application.", "reasons": "Iṣlāḥī says Meccan and Ṭāʾif leaders mistook wealth for divine favor; early 'revealed about' reports can mark an application rather than the occasion. The word for the person can have singular or plural antecedents. Elmalılı says a specific occasion leaves the warning generally applicable by the described traits. Mujāhid and Māwardī note that everyone starts in the same solitary state."}]}
{"id": "74:11/q04", "question": "What does 'alone' describe and mean here?", "turns_on": "The grammatical attachment of the circumstantial accusative to God, the created person, or the speaker's pronoun; whether an epithet is recalled, mocked, or understood as blame.", "positions": [{"id": "74:11/q04/p1", "position": "The man was created alone, initially without wealth, children, or support.", "reasons": "Ibn Qutayba, Mujāhid and many others specify no wealth or sons; Wāḥidī's majority also says no wife. Tabarī, Thaʿlabī, Bagha wī and others put him in his mother's womb. Qushayrī says without a supporter; Iṣlāḥī adds status, companions and confidants; Biqāʿī says from nothing, through stages, with no property. Grammatically waḥīdan is the circumstantial accusative of the created man, the relative man, or its omitted object, as Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān, Nasafī, Samīn and Ibn ʿĀshūr explain; Naḥḥās and Zajjāj identify a circumstantial accusative. Abū Ḥayyān calls this the apparent parse; Ibn ʿAtiyya prefers it if the nickname is unproved. Kashshāf, Rāzī, Elmalılı and Iṣlāḥī compare the solitary first creation at 6:94. God later gave him wealth and sons, intensifying his ingratitude; Muqātil, Qatāda, Māwardī, Kashshāf, Qurṭubī, Ibn Kathīr and others make that contrast."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p2", "position": "God alone created the man, without any partner in creation.", "reasons": "Zajjāj gives this as the other referent of the circumstantial accusative. Wāḥidī attributes the construction to al-Farrāʾ, al-Kisāʾī and Zajjāj: God knows the man and has power over him. Kashshāf, Rāzī, Samīn, Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān and Ālūsī add that the sole Creator can own, avenge or destroy him without help. Biqāʿī draws a contrast with the man's shirk. Ṭabāṭabāʾī prefers this parse, because God alone created and managed the man and can be entrusted with him. Elmalılı and Asad emphasize the Creator's uniqueness."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p3", "position": "God is alone with the man to avenge and punish him.", "reasons": "Waḥīdan is circumstantial from the first-person object of dharnī, as Rāzī, Bayḍāwī, Nasafī and Samīn explain. Mujāhid, cited by Qurṭubī, Abū Ḥayyān and Ālūsī, says God suffices as the man's avenger; Kashshāf says no other avenger is needed. Ṭabāṭabāʾī reports this parse without preferring it."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p4", "position": "It alludes, often derisively, to al-Walīd's epithet 'the Unique One' or his boast of being without equal.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAbbās says he was called al-Waḥīd; ʿAṭāʾ reports his boast 'unique son of the unique,' unequaled among Arabs. Reports explain the title by unmatched wealth, sons, rank and leadership; Ibn ʿĀshūr says he was older than Abū Jahl and Abū Sufyān. Al-Qummī instead says he claimed sole responsibility for one year's Kaʿba covering while Quraysh shared the next. Kashshāf says the title may postdate the verse; otherwise the verse mocks worldly distinction by recalling destitution. Rāzī and Samīn parse it as an accusative of disparagement, with Ṭabāṭabāʾī reporting an implied 'I condemn.' Ibn ʿĀshūr says the wording shifts from his boast to dependence at birth, citing 16:78. Wāḥidī rejects the nickname as the intended sense because God would appear to affirm a false boast; Ibn ʿAtiyya finds its report unproved. Rāzī answers that a proper name need not assert its quality, or means unique in his own estimation, citing 44:49; Qurṭubī likewise says a boast can be repeated without endorsement."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p5", "position": "It disparages him as uniquely wicked, lowly, or insignificant.", "reasons": "Rāzī says uniqueness need not denote rank: it can mark unbelief, vileness and lowliness. Bayḍāwī, Samīn, Abū Ḥayyān, Bursawī and Ālūsī similarly turn the boast into blame. Abū Ḥayyān cites the proper-name response to an objection over insult; Bursawī cites 44:49."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p6", "position": "It disparages him as having unknown paternity or being born outside marriage.", "reasons": "Abū Saʿīd al-Ḍarīr takes waḥīdan as a second object of 'created' and relates the insult to 68:13. Qurṭubī and Elmalılı mention the same link. Abū Jaʿfar, through al-ʿAyyāshī, says claiming to be 'son of the unique' would shame someone without a known father. Reports from Abū ʿAbd Allāh and Abū Jaʿfar gloss al-waḥīd as a child born outside marriage. Bayḍāwī, Bursawī and Ālūsī also report this sense, the last describing uncertain lineage or adoption. Abū Ḥayyān raises the difficulty of using it as an insult and replies with the proper-name or uniquely evil readings."}, {"id": "74:11/q04/p7", "position": "His solitary beginning also points to his solitary return at resurrection.", "reasons": "Māwardī and Qurṭubī say he will be raised alone as he was created. Elmalılı treats this as an individual phase of resurrection and cites 6:94. Asad and Study Quran add 6:94 and 19:80, 19:95 for life's solitary end."}]}
{"id": "74:11/q05", "question": "What report explains the revelation about al-Walīd?", "turns_on": "The reports differ over whether the decisive setting was his private hearing followed by Abū Jahl's pressure or a Quraysh council preparing a public pilgrimage charge; recited passages and details also vary.", "positions": [{"id": "74:11/q05/p1", "position": "He was impressed by a recitation, but Abū Jahl pressed him into calling it transmitted magic.", "reasons": "ʿIkrima and Ibn ʿAbbās say he softened and praised Qurʾan as sweet, radiant, fruitful, elevated, powerful and unlike poetry or human and jinn speech. Abū Jahl used Quraysh's fear that his conversion would attract the tribe, alleging he sought food or money from the Prophet or Abū Bakr. Al-Walīd rejected the allegation, reflected, then said it was inherited magic. Muqātil says the Prophet had recited Ghāfir 40:1–3 in the Sacred Mosque and repeated it when al-Walīd listened: God is sovereign and all-knowing, forgives repentant associators, severely punishes unrepentant shirk, is independent of unbelievers, affirms unity and receives all creatures in the hereafter. Al-Qummī names 41:13 instead. Al-Ḥākim authenticated the Ibn ʿAbbās report, also transmitted as ʿIkrima's mursal report; Ṭabāṭabāʾī cites al-Bayhaqī too. Durr preserves a variant in which al-Walīd said he would avoid Abū Bakr, ʿUmar and Muhammad. Muqātil says the accusation distressed the Prophet, whom 51:52 consoles by recalling earlier prophets accused of sorcery or madness."}, {"id": "74:11/q05/p2", "position": "At pilgrimage season, Quraysh sought one charge against Muhammad; al-Walīd rejected others and chose 'sorcerer' because the message divided families.", "reasons": "Ibn Hishām's Ibn Isḥāq report has Quraysh request a single story; al-Walīd rejects soothsayer, madman, poet and sorcerer as accurate, yet settles on sorcerer for the family-division allegation. Muqātil says he also rejected 'liar' because Muhammad was known as trustworthy, then pondered, grimaced (basara), changed color, and said magic. Muqātil also records his allegati
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
