<<chunk 246, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "90:7/q12", "question": "How do surrounding verses and the sūra frame this question?", "turns_on": "The notes make different links: divine faculties and judgment, structural parallels and self-sufficiency, or the spending claim against the sūra's difficult moral path.", "positions": [{"id": "90:7/q12/p1", "position": "The paired questions and the ensuing gifts establish God's power to see, judge, and requite.", "reasons": "Al-Qurṭubī and al-Ālūsī say eyes, tongue and lips or the two eyes recall divine favor and prove power to account and resurrect. Ibn ʿĀshūr cites 67:14: the creator of perception and speech knows and judges acts. Al-Sāmarrāʾī says the eyes directly answer the assumption of being unseen; al-Tibyān says the creator who gave strength is more powerful and knows deeds. Bint al-Shāṭiʾ pairs future power and past surveillance across the human's full course and invokes 96:6–8 on arrogance, creation and return. Elmalılı also links gifts to power, knowledge and divergent souls."}, {"id": "90:7/q12/p2", "position": "The repeated questions bind the stanza and challenge imagined independence from God.", "reasons": "Corpus Coranicum says the second stanza resumes the introduction's human theme in two rhymed triplets, with repeated third-person polemical questions and matching openings and rhyme. It compares the self-sufficiency theme with 104:1–3, 80:5, 92:8 and 96:7 and the questioning with 75:3 and 75:36. Al-Biqāʿī treats concealment as a fourth carnal desire and says unfulfilled desires drive hardship; Iṣlāḥī describes conceit about self-earned status that breeds indifference to God and the Hereafter."}, {"id": "90:7/q12/p3", "position": "The spending boast is set against the harder moral paths and service to others.", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī says spending alone falls short of difficult servitude and solidarity with believers. Iṣlāḥī says the boasters should thank God and help the needy, while their accounts of personal and collective expenses excuse miserliness. He glosses mālan lubadā as much wealth. Al-Thaʿlabī reports three vocalizations of lubadan: Abū Jaʿfar doubles bāʾ as a collective of labid and rākiʿ; Mujāhid rounds both lām and bāʾ with light bāʾ, with heavy-matter and reclining-man usages; others have ḍamma on lām and fatḥa on light bāʾ as plural of heap or a non-derived singular. Al-Sāmarrāʾī calls najd a raised hard path matching the sūra's hardship, unlike easy sabīl; most commentators call the two paths good and evil, and a Prophetic report cautions against preferring evil, which he judges closer. Guidance shows the paths without guaranteeing the good destination, as 22:4 illustrates."}]}
{"id": "90:8/q01", "question": "What does the question 'Have We not made' convey?", "turns_on": "Ibn ʿĀshūr permits both assent and reproach; Bint al-Shāṭiʾ attends to the contrast in tense.", "positions": [{"id": "90:8/q01/p1", "position": "It calls for assent to the fact that God made these faculties.", "reasons": "Elmalılı spells out the affirmative answer: yes, We made them. Ibn ʿĀshūr allows a confirmatory question. Corpus Coranicum compares the ʾa-lam question in lists of divine favors in 93:6–8 and 94:1–4."}, {"id": "90:8/q01/p2", "position": "It reproaches and rejects the person's boast.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿĀshūr says the question may reject the boast, especially the claim that no one saw him (90:7); the senses given by God make that boast untenable."}, {"id": "90:8/q01/p3", "position": "Its past tense points to gifts already given before the person became arrogant.", "reasons": "Bint al-Shāṭiʾ contrasts the past construction with alam against lan, which projects the person's deluded claim that no one will ever overpower him into the future."}]}
{"id": "90:8/q02", "question": "What are the two eyes and what do they enable?", "turns_on": "Whether the pair denotes only the physical organs or also the heart's sight; Elmalılı expressly gives both possibilities.", "positions": [{"id": "90:8/q02/p1", "position": "They are the two bodily eyes that give sight of the visible world.", "reasons": "Al-Dāmghānī explicitly calls them literal eyes. Al-Ṭabarī says they see God's proofs; al-Kashshāf, al-Bayḍāwī, al-Nasafī, Ibn Kathīr, al-Ālūsī and others say they see visible things. Al-Kashshāf, al-Qurṭubī and Abū Ḥayyān distinguish the tongue's expression and the lips' covering of the mouth and help with speech, eating, drinking and blowing. Al-Bursawī adds sight from earth to heaven, recognition of benefit and harm, and viewing the world, Qurʾān and divine signs. He describes the eye as an image-receiving mirror: small pupil, quick movement, lids and lashes protect it; eyes sit high like a beacon lamp, are paired like sun and moon, have dark brows and pupils to reduce glare, and black lashes that strengthen vision. His report relates black clothing to glare from white marble and says antimony strengthens sight. He says movable pupils see without neck movement and eyes at one level prevent double vision. Al-Biqāʿī says they form symmetrically in the womb's three darknesses, with varied colors and an inexplicable power of sight. Quṭb emphasizes their precise construction; al-Rāzī points to anatomy books for the extraordinary properties of bodily organs. Ibn Jurayj leaves further benefits unspecified as 'and so on.'"}, {"id": "90:8/q02/p2", "position": "The pair can also encompass outward sight and an inward eye of insight.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAṭāʾ says the bodily eye sees signs of divine workmanship while the heart's eye sees loci of the unseen. Al-Wāsiṭī distinguishes an eye for created things from a special eye perceiving the Creator. Al-Biqāʿī contrasts sensory sight and moral insight, which open desire for perceived good and escape from evil. Al-Bursawī says both outer and inner eyes should be guarded and binocular sight is more complete. Elmalılı offers the visible pair or one visible eye with the heart's eye as possibilities."}]}
{"id": "90:8/q03", "question": "Why are the eyes singled out?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "90:8/q03/p1", "position": "Sight is especially useful and directly answers the claim that no one sees the person.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿĀshūr gives both grounds: the eyes are the most useful of the senses, and their mention answers the preceding claim in 90:7."}]}
{"id": "90:8/q04", "question": "What lesson follows from God giving these faculties?", "turns_on": "The notes draw several complementary consequences from the gifts: gratitude, proof of divine power and knowledge, restraint, and moral choice.", "positions": [{"id": "90:8/q04/p1", "position": "The visible gifts call for reflection and gratitude to God.", "reasons": "Qatāda repeatedly calls the eyes, tongue and lips evident, abundant or recurring blessings that God uses to remind people to give thanks; al-Thaʿlabī says they compel gratitude. Al-Baghawī says the enumeration calls the person to reflect. Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls them blessings that establish proof against him. Al-Biqāʿī says the intricacy of the eyes and their formation in the womb call for gratitude. Al-Nasafī calls the eyes a favor, and Ibn Jurayj leaves other benefits implicit."}, {"id": "90:8/q04/p2", "position": "The maker of human perception can see, know, overpower, resurrect and reckon the person.", "reasons": "Abū Isḥāq and Ibn al-Jawzī invoke the eyes as signs of resurrection; al-Wāḥidī, al-Qurṭubī, al-Ālūsī and Study Quran add reckoning. Al-Rāzī says the maker of rational heart and eloquent tongue from humble fluid can destroy creation and knows hidden things, removing excuse for denial or spending against religion. Al-Biqāʿī says the benefactor knows affairs and can bring benefit or harm, personally or through whomever He wills. Ibn ʿĀshūr invokes 67:14: the giver of knowledge cannot be ignorant or powerless. Al-Ḥasan frames the boast as a challenge to who will account for spending."}, {"id": "90:8/q04/p3", "position": "Sight and speech are entrusted for lawful, accountable use.", "reasons": "The reported address commands closing lids and lips against forbidden sight and speech and restraining sexual desire. Al-Biqāʿī urges lawful perception and avoidance of what God forbids. Bint al-Shāṭiʾ stresses accountable sight and words rather than mere anatomy shared with animals. Iṣlāḥī says wealth has distracted addressees from seeing the needy around them. Quṭb contrasts the gift of sight with boasting and withholding what God supplied. Al-Bursawī says the outward and inward eyes should both be guarded."}, {"id": "90:8/q04/p4", "position": "These senses equip people for knowledge, moral discernment and responsible choice.", "reasons": "Al-Qāshānī says bodily faculties permit perfection, learning from lessons, asking and speaking before guidance to good and evil. Ibn ʿĀshūr presents a progression from senses that acquire knowledge, to speech that communicates it, to guidance that tests good and evil. Bint al-Shāṭiʾ says innate discernment equips a human to bear the difficult trust. Kur'an Yolu links external knowledge to judgment of truth and falsehood and choice; it calls humans exceptional, responsible beings. Al-Ṭabarī specifically says the eyes see divine proofs."}]}
{"id": "90:8/q05", "question": "What does the reported divine address say about guarding the faculties?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "90:8/q05/p1", "position": "God gave coverings or means of restraint, so people should close their eyes, lips and sexual organs against forbidden use.", "reasons": "The Prophet's report in al-Thaʿlabī speaks of two coverings each for tongue, eyes and private parts. Al-Baghawī describes lips, eyelids and other bodily means; his fuller version addresses Adam's child. Abū Ḥāzim's report in al-Qurṭubī specifies lips, eyelids and protective coverings against forbidden speech, sight and desire. Al-Durr's reports command lawful use and closing eyes against the forbidden; one adds that humans cannot bear God's anger or withstand His vengeance. These are var
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
