<<chunk 253, part 3 of 0..4>>
tes or the one who created everything, and it rules out idols as true lords because Arabs did not ascribe creation to them. STUDYQURAN: The first mention of creation may mean that God creates all existence from nothing."}, {"id": "96:1/q15/p2", "position": "God, who created the human being, as the following verse specifies.", "reasons": "Muqātil refers it to the human; al-Samīn says the second 'created' can specify the first, magnifying human creation."}, {"id": "96:1/q15/p3", "position": "The One who owns creation.", "reasons": "Al-Bayḍāwī reports the alternative that the clause denotes ownership of creation, before the text singles out humanity."}, {"id": "96:1/q15/p4", "position": "God manifesting Himself in created form.", "reasons": ""}]}
{"id": "96:1/q16", "question": "How is the relative clause 'who created' parsed?", "turns_on": "Its possible case and syntactic attachment.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q16/p1", "position": "Genitive adjective modifying rabb.", "reasons": "Al-Naḥḥās gives the genitive reading as an adjective of rabb."}, {"id": "96:1/q16/p2", "position": "Nominative with an implied subject.", "reasons": "Al-Naḥḥās allows nominative with an understood subject."}, {"id": "96:1/q16/p3", "position": "Accusative of specification, 'I mean the one who created'.", "reasons": "Al-Naḥḥās allows accusative of specification, 'I mean'."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q17", "question": "What object, if any, is understood after 'created'?", "turns_on": "Whether the verb has no object, an all-encompassing omitted object, or anticipates the human in verse 2.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q17/p1", "position": "The omitted object is everything, for the wording is unrestricted.", "reasons": "Al-Kashshāf and al-Nasafī say unrestricted wording supplies 'everything'; Abū Ḥayyān and al-Samīn similarly take the omission universally. BIQAI: The omitted object makes creation universal: God determines and brings every existent thing into being, and each remains subject to His permission, prevention, harm, and benefit. BIQAI-FULL: The unexpressed object of “created” makes the attribute comprehensive: everything that comes into existence is God's making and remains subject to His permission, prevention, harm, or benefit. ALUSI: Khalaqa can be intransitive, meaning the one who creates, or have a general omitted object, meaning the one who created everything; either way its force is universal. ALUSI-FULL: Who created recalls God's original favor and ability to teach reading; it may mean the one who creates or the one who created everything, and it rules out idols as true lords because Arabs did not ascribe creation to them. IBNASHUR: The first “created” may be treated as intransitive, with its object omitted for generality (“all creation”), or with “the human” anticipated from the following clause. IBNASHUR-FULL: The object after the first 'created' may be omitted because the verb is intransitive, to mean the Creator; omitted for generality, to mean all creation; or supplied by the next phrase as 'humanity.' Against—BINTSHATI: She rejects supplying an unstated object for خلق and keeps the first verse’s creation unqualified; the following verse then specifies the human being."}, {"id": "96:1/q17/p2", "position": "No object is supplied; God's act of creating is stated absolutely.", "reasons": "Al-Kashshāf and al-Nasafī say no object is supplied when the wording stresses God alone as creator. ALUSI: Khalaqa can be intransitive, meaning the one who creates, or have a general omitted object, meaning the one who created everything; either way its force is universal. ALUSI-FULL: Who created recalls God's original favor and ability to teach reading; it may mean the one who creates or the one who created everything, and it rules out idols as true lords because Arabs did not ascribe creation to them. IBNASHUR: The first “created” may be treated as intransitive, with its object omitted for generality (“all creation”), or with “the human” anticipated from the following clause. IBNASHUR-FULL: The object after the first 'created' may be omitted because the verb is intransitive, to mean the Creator; omitted for generality, to mean all creation; or supplied by the next phrase as 'humanity.' BINTSHATI: She rejects supplying an unstated object for خلق and keeps the first verse’s creation unqualified; the following verse then specifies the human being."}, {"id": "96:1/q17/p3", "position": "The following 'human' supplies or explains the first verb's object.", "reasons": "Al-Samīn suggests the second creation clause explains the first. IBNASHUR: The first “created” may be treated as intransitive, with its object omitted for generality (“all creation”), or with “the human” anticipated from the following clause. IBNASHUR-FULL: The object after the first 'created' may be omitted because the verb is intransitive, to mean the Creator; omitted for generality, to mean all creation; or supplied by the next phrase as 'humanity.' Against—BINTSHATI: She rejects supplying an unstated object for خلق and keeps the first verse’s creation unqualified; the following verse then specifies the human being."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q18", "question": "Why identify the Lord as Creator?", "turns_on": "Whether the description rules out idols, recalls divine favor, proves teaching, or serves cadence.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q18/p1", "position": "It distinguishes God from idols called lords, since they create nothing.", "reasons": "Al-Māwardī, Ibn ʿAṭiyya, and Abū Ḥayyān note that Arabs called idols lords but conceded none of them created; the clause therefore removes ambiguity. BURSEVI (فتح الرحمن): Fath al-Rahman says the Creator attribute answers Arabs who called idols lords, since idols cannot share in creating. ALUSI (قيل): Another explanation says the creator description confirms that the intended Lord is God, since Arabs called idols lords but did not attribute creation to them. ALUSI-FULL: Who created recalls God's original favor and ability to teach reading; it may mean the one who creates or the one who created everything, and it rules out idols as true lords because Arabs did not ascribe creation to them. IBNASHUR: The relative clause signals why God's name should be invoked: He is Creator, whereas idols are not; polytheists themselves acknowledged that God created the heavens and earth, so creation is the clearest proof of uniqueness.; cites 31:25 IBNASHUR-FULL: Calling God 'the Creator' implies exclusive divinity: because He alone created, people should invoke Him rather than al-Lat or al-Uzza, though the polytheists acknowledged His creation of heaven and earth.; cites 31:25 BINTSHATI: The command is to recite in the name of the Creator, the rightful Lord rather than the idols the Arabs had fashioned and then worshiped. BINTSHATI: She centers Rabbika on the Prophet’s long search for guidance: the Creator revealed Himself as the Lord worthy of worship over created Arabian idols. BINTSHATI (بعض المفسرين): Al-Razi transmits an argument that naming God as Creator leads idolaters gradually to acknowledge Him: they know they did not create themselves and that their handmade idols did not create them. BINTSHATI: The context plainly asserts the Creator’s lordship; humans are singled out because they read, learn, bear obligations, and receive the revealed words. BINTSHATI (أبو حيان): Abu Hayyan says Rabbuka comforts Muhammad and identifies his exclusive Lord; the Creator attribute follows because Arabs called idols lords, though idols cannot create."}, {"id": "96:1/q18/p2", "position": "Creation proves God's power to teach and nurture the Prophet.", "reasons": "Rāzī makes creation from nonexistence the ground of nurture; creation of the clot-grown human proves power to teach and care. BURSEVI: Calling God the Creator recalls the first blessing and proves that the One who gave humanity life and its perfections can teach reading; creation belongs solely to Him. ALUSI: The description recalls God's first favor to the Prophet and signals God's power to teach him to read in the gentlest way. ALUSI-FULL: Who created recalls God's original favor and ability to teach reading; it may mean the one who creates or the one who created everything, and it rules out idols as true lords because Arabs did not ascribe creation to them. ELMALILI: The attachment to “your Lord” explains the command through God's role as creator and caretaker, leaving no doubt that He can teach an unlettered recipient. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Creation is stressed because God made both human capacity for reading and the objects studied; denying God or gratitude while using these gifts is profound ingratitude."}, {"id": "96:1/q18/p3", "position": "Visible creation offers proof of divine existence, wisdom, power, and unique lordship.", "reasons": "Jishumī says things are measured by divine wisdom; Rāzī distinguishes rational proof from creation and transmitted knowledge from the pen; al-Bayḍāwī says knowledge of God is the first obligation. BIQAI: Creation is named before command because it is perceptible, easier to conceive, and clearer evidence of God's existence, power, and wisdom; knowing God through His acts is the first obligation. BIQAI-FULL: Creation is placed before command because it is visible, easier to understand, and a clear proof of existence, power, and wisdom; knowing God through His acts is the first obligation. IBNASHUR: The relative clause signals why God's name should be invoked: He is Creator, whereas idols are not; polytheists themselves acknowledged that God created the heavens and earth, so creation is the clearest proof of uniqueness.; cites 31:25 IBNASHUR-FULL: Calling God 'the Creator' implies exclusive divinity: because He alone created, people should invoke Him rather than al-Lat or al-Uzza, though the polytheists acknowledged His creation of heaven and earth.; cites 31:25 IBNASHUR-FULL: The opening five verses gather divine attributes: lordship implies existence and oneness, creation and teaching 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
