<<chunk 253, part 1 of 0..4>>
d rather than the idols the Arabs had fashioned and then worshiped. BINTSHATI (الفخر الرازي): Al-Razi takes the command to recite in God’s name as implying that every Quran recitation should begin with God’s name. CORPUSCORANICUM (Nöldeke and Schwally): Nöldeke and Schwally object that qaraʾa elsewhere in the Quran means recite from a text or memory, supporting the usual translation recite in the name of your Lord.; cites 16:98, 17:93, 69:19, 73:20, 87:6 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Reading can mean in the Creator Lord's name or for the Creator; every reading or activity should begin with, serve, and seek help from God rather than another being."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p2", "position": "Recite or remember the Lord's name; the bāʾ is extra.", "reasons": "Abū ʿUbayda's extra-bāʾ analysis is transmitted by al-Baghawī, Rāzī, and al-Samīn; Ibn Qutayba compares 23:20 and other constructions; al-Ṭabrisī invokes God's beautiful names (17:110). Rāzī rejects the analysis because it discards the bāʾ without benefit and fails to explain Muhammad's reply. BURHAN: باء also appears with objects in examples such as بأيديكم, بالمودة, باسم ربك, and بأيكم المفتون; المفتون is a passive participle, not a verbal noun.; cites 68:6, 76:6, 22:25, 23:20, 4:43 BIQAI: Reading in the Lord's name may mean beginning with the basmala, seeking help from the beneficent Lord, or mentioning His name; on the last reading, the name stands for His sublime attributes. BIQAI-FULL: “In the name of your Lord” means beginning with the basmala, seeking the benefactor's aid, or mentioning His name; in the last reading, the name stands for His exalted attributes. ALUSI-FULL: Read has an implied object, what is revealed of the Quran; the verb is not intransitive and باسم ربك is not its object with an extra ba, contrary to Abu Ubayda. CORPUSCORANICUM (Hirschfeld 1902): Hirschfeld recognizes a correspondence between iqraʾ bi-smi rabbika and the Hebrew formula qārāʾ be-šem YHWH, then proposes proclaim the name of your Lord. Against—ALUSI (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda takes the bāʾ as extra and the object of iqraʾ as bismi rabbik, yielding the meaning remember your Lord; al-Ālūsī rejects this. Against—ALUSI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda treats the ba as extra and reads the command as Remember your Lord; al-Alusi rejects this, taking the ba as original accompaniment attached to read or an implied circumstantial phrase. Against—TABATABAI: The phrase ‘in the name of your Lord’ is not the object of ‘read’ with an extra ba, yielding ‘read your Lord’s name’ or merely say the basmala."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p3", "position": "Seek help through God's name when reciting.", "reasons": "Rāzī compares the name's aid to a pen used for writing, especially apt when Muhammad said he could not read; al-Bayḍāwī also gives aid as an option. Abū Ḥayyān records Abū ʿUbayda's analysis that 'name' itself is extra. BIQAI: Reading in the Lord's name may mean beginning with the basmala, seeking help from the beneficent Lord, or mentioning His name; on the last reading, the name stands for His sublime attributes. BIQAI-FULL: “In the name of your Lord” means beginning with the basmala, seeking the benefactor's aid, or mentioning His name; in the last reading, the name stands for His exalted attributes. IBNASHUR: One analysis begins the recitation with “In God's name”: bi marks assistance and attaches either to an omitted “begin” or to a second “read,” fronted to emphasize God's name; it implies Muhammad uttered the phrase on receiving the revelation. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Reading can mean in the Creator Lord's name or for the Creator; every reading or activity should begin with, serve, and seek help from God rather than another being. Against—ALUSI: The bāʾ can also mean seeking assistance, but association is preferable because it avoids making God's name an instrument for something else. Against—ALUSI-FULL: Al-Alusi prefers the ba as accompaniment because that avoids implying God's name is an instrument; it may alternatively indicate seeking aid."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p4", "position": "The bāʾ has the force of ʿalā, 'upon'.", "reasons": "Al-Akhfash, reported by Abū Ḥayyān and al-Samīn, compares 11:41, boarding the ship 'upon' God's name. Al-Qurṭubī gives the same force and supplies the omitted Qurʾān as object."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p5", "position": "Recite with awareness of God's name and majesty.", "reasons": "ALUSI: The bāʾ is original and marks association; it attaches to iqraʾ or to an omitted circumstantial expression, so the command means begin or open by God's name. ALUSI (قتادة): A reading attributed to Qatāda takes the bāʾ phrase as an omitted circumstantial expression: read while beginning with your Lord's name. ALUSI: The bāʾ can also mean seeking assistance, but association is preferable because it avoids making God's name an instrument for something else. ALUSI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda treats the ba as extra and reads the command as Remember your Lord; al-Alusi rejects this, taking the ba as original accompaniment attached to read or an implied circumstantial phrase. ALUSI-FULL: Al-Alusi prefers the ba as accompaniment because that avoids implying God's name is an instrument; it may alternatively indicate seeking aid. IBNASHUR: Alternatively, bi marks accompaniment: recite with awareness of God's majesty; fronting gives the phrase exclusivity and rejects invoking idols such as al-Lat and al-Uzza, establishing Islam's first principle of monotheism. TABATABAI: ‘In the name of your Lord’ attaches to an implied ‘beginning’ or to ‘read’ with the ba of accompaniment; the basmala is part of the surah and God teaches by having the Prophet begin with it."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p6", "position": "Dedicate recitation to God, so it is for His sake.", "reasons": "Rāzī says dedication to God puts the act beyond Satan's interference; naming God before eating prevents Satan sharing it, and a neutral act becomes worship when it aids obedience. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Reading can mean in the Creator Lord's name or for the Creator; every reading or activity should begin with, serve, and seek help from God rather than another being."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p7", "position": "God's 'name' here means the Qurʾān.", "reasons": "Al-Qurṭubī reports the view that the Lord's 'name' denotes the Qurʾān, citing 23:20 and a poem about reading sūras."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p8", "position": "The word 'name' is extra, yielding help from the Lord Himself.", "reasons": "Abū Ḥayyān reports Abū ʿUbayda's additional analysis: ism is extra and the recitation is through the Lord's aid."}, {"id": "96:1/q08/p9", "position": "Read upon God's name, meaning by His permission.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR: A third analysis takes bi as “upon,” as in 3:75: read upon your Lord's name, meaning at His permission, since the angel was sent by Him.; cites 3:75"}]}
{"id": "96:1/q09", "question": "What practice does the opening command imply for the basmala?", "turns_on": "Whether it requires or supports saying the basmala at each sūra opening.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q09/p1", "position": "Begin every sūra or Qurʾān recitation with the basmala.", "reasons": "Al-Wāḥidī explicitly prefers this inference against omitting the basmala; Rāzī argues the opening requires it at every sūra, and al-Qurṭubī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya report the same practice. BIQAI: The commentators say this indicates that recitation is not complete without invoking God's name; honoring the name honors its bearer and all that is attributed to Him. BIQAI-FULL (قالوا): They say recitation is not complete without naming God; naming Him honors both the name and its bearer and all His attributes. ALUSI: On this reading one must begin by saying in God's name; opening with another name would not fulfill the command. ALUSI: Some use the command to argue that the basmala is part of every sūra, though al-Ālūsī says the inference needs discussion. ALUSI (قتادة): Qatāda explains the command as beginning in the Lord’s name: say “In God’s name,” then recite; without the basmala, or with an idol’s name, the command would not be fulfilled. ALUSI-FULL (قتادة): According to a reading attributed to Qatada, the command means begin or open with your Lord's name, saying the basmala and then reading; this supports requiring basmala when reading and has been used to argue it belongs to every surah, though al-Alusi notes debate. BINTSHATI (الفخر الرازي): Al-Razi takes the command to recite in God’s name as implying that every Quran recitation should begin with God’s name."}, {"id": "96:1/q09/p2", "position": "The phrase directs the first recitation to begin with God's name without proving every sūra's basmala obligatory.", "reasons": "Al-Kashshāf and al-Nasafī construe the opening as a circumstance of this recitation, without stating the wider rule."}, {"id": "96:1/q09/p3", "position": "The inference that it is part of or required for every sūra remains disputed.", "reasons": "ALUSI: Some use the command to argue that the basmala is part of every sūra, though al-Ālūsī says the inference needs discussion. ALUSI: Others infer from the contrast that the basmala is not Qurʾān, but one can answer that the understood Qurʾān as object is restricted to what follows the basmala. ALUSI-FULL (قتادة): According to a reading attributed to Qatada, the command means begin or open with your Lord's name, saying the basmala and then reading; this supports requiring basmala when reading and has been used to argue it belongs to every surah, though al-Alusi notes debate. ALUSI-FULL (النووي): Some argue that the basmala is not Quran at the beginnings of surahs because it is absent from sound accounts of the first revelation; al-Nawawi reports this argument, while proponents answer that it descended later."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q10", "question": "Is the basmala itself part of the earliest revelation or of each sūra?", "turns_on": "Whether reports omit it, place it first, or allow a later descent.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q10/p1", "position": "The basmala was the f
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
