<<chunk 254, part 4 of 0..5>>
 Aisha relates the Prophet's retreat with Khadija, encounter with Gabriel and Michael, opening of his belly and chest, then command to read; he retained the verses thereafter. ITQAN: Of the reports about the first revelation, the soundest view is that it began with اقرأ باسم ربك; Aisha’s report in the two Sahih collections recounts the true dreams, retreat at Hira, and Gabriel’s three commands to read through ما لم يعلم.; cites 96:1, 96:5 ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd ibn Umayr reports that Gabriel instructed the Prophet to read and then recited اقرأ باسم ربك, which the Prophet called the first revelation. ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd b. ʿUmayr says Gabriel brought the Prophet a silk sheet and told him to recite; he identifies the opening of al-ʿAlaq as the first sura sent down. ALUSI (عائشة): In the beginning-of-revelation report, the angel squeezed the Prophet three times, then recited the opening verses through the command to teach what was not known; the report is transmitted by Aḥmad and both Ṣaḥīḥ compilers.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI (النووي): Al-Nawawī says mā in the Prophet's response mā anā bi-qāriʾ is a negation, which fits a first command; otherwise refusing to read after prior instruction would be a grave sin. ALUSI (الآمدي): Al-Āmidī uses the repeated command and question in the beginning-of-revelation report as evidence that clarification may be delayed: Gabriel says read three times before specifying what to read. ALUSI-FULL: Al-Alusi follows the view that the opening of Iqra was the first revelation outright, supported by Aisha's highly authentic report; ما أنا بقارئ is a statement of inability, not refusal, which would otherwise be grave disobedience. QUTB-ZILAL (عائشة): In the report Qutb says is recorded in both Sahih collections, Aisha recounts true dreams preceding revelation, solitary worship at Hira, Gabriel's three commands to read, and the first five verses. QUTB-ZILAL (ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq also transmits a longer version of the revelation account through Wahb ibn Kaysan from Ubayd. IBNASHUR (عائشة): Aisha's report in the two Sahih collections describes Gabriel pressing the Prophet three times; each time he answered that he could not read, and at the third command Gabriel recited the opening verses through “what he did not know.” IBNASHUR: Aisha's wording that Muhammad returned bearing the revelation and Khadija asked Waraqa to hear him shows he understood and recited the verses after the third command; Gabriel's repetitions familiarized him with an unlearned act. IBNASHUR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha narrates in the two Sahihs that Gabriel came to Muhammad in Hira, commanded him three times, embraced him forcefully each time, then recited the opening through 'what he did not know.' IBNASHUR-FULL: Aisha's narration is directly from the Prophet; her account that he returned trembling with the passage means he retained and recited what had been dictated. IBNASHUR-FULL: Khadija's request that Waraqa hear him further indicates Muhammad recited the revealed passage immediately; Gabriel's repeated command repeated God's wording to accustom him to reading. BINTSHATI (عائشة أم المؤمنين): Aisha recounts Muhammad’s true dreams, retreat to Hira, Gabriel’s command and three embraces, and the recitation of the opening five verses, which remained fixed in his heart; no grading is stated. BINTSHATI (عائشة أم المؤمنين): Aisha continues that Muhammad saw Gabriel in the sky, returned to Khadija, and was reassured because his character included kinship, truthfulness, trustworthiness, hospitality, and helping in adversity; no grading is stated."}, {"id": "96:1/q23/p2", "position": "Gabriel brought a written silk or brocade cloth bearing the opening passage.", "reasons": "ʿAbd al-Razzāq transmits ʿAmr ibn Dīnār and al-Zuhrī's silk-cloth account; Ibn Hishām reports ʿUbayd's written silk, while al-Māwardī calls it patterned cloth. DURR (الزهري وعمرو بن دينار): Al-Zuhrī and ʿAmr b. Dīnār report that, at Ḥirāʾ, an angel brought the Prophet brocade bearing the opening five verses in writing. DURR (عمرو بن جابر): ʿAmr b. Jābir likewise reports that an angel came to the Prophet at Ḥirāʾ with brocade inscribed through “what he did not know.” DURR-FULL (الزهري وعمرو بن دينار): They report that at Hira an angel brought a brocade cloth inscribed with the first revelation through ‘what he did not know.’ DURR-FULL (عمرو بن جابر): He transmits the same report of an angel at Hira bringing the opening passage written on brocade. ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd b. ʿUmayr says Gabriel brought the Prophet a silk sheet and told him to recite; he identifies the opening of al-ʿAlaq as the first sura sent down. ITQAN (الزهري): Al-Zuhrī recounts that while the Prophet was at Ḥirāʾ, an angel brought a silk sheet inscribed with the opening verses of al-ʿAlaq. ALUSI: An account says Gabriel came to the Prophet at Ḥirāʾ with silk brocade bearing the opening verses; he asked him to read, and the Prophet replied that he could not read.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 QUTB-ZILAL (عبد الله بن الزبير): Al-Tabari's report from Ibn al-Zubayr recounts the Prophet's alternate account: an angel brought written silk during sleep, recited the opening passage, and left it inscribed in his heart; later Gabriel appeared in the sky and identified himself. QUTB-ZILAL (ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq also transmits a longer version of the revelation account through Wahb ibn Kaysan from Ubayd. Against—ALUSI: Al-Ālūsī questions using the brocade account to explain the command as a recitation of visible writing, and notes that al-Āmidī's handling of the report also has a problem."}, {"id": "96:1/q23/p3", "position": "Gabriel and Michael opened or washed Muhammad's chest before the recitation.", "reasons": "DURR (عائشة): A second ʿĀʾisha account describes Gabriel’s vast appearance, washing the Prophet’s opened chest, teaching the opening five verses, and weighing him against men; Michael says his community will follow. DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha relates the Prophet's retreat with Khadija, encounter with Gabriel and Michael, opening of his belly and chest, then command to read; he retained the verses thereafter. DURR-FULL (ميكائيل): In the continuing report, Gabriel weighs the Prophet against one, then two, then one hundred men; Michael says his community will follow him, and stones and trees greet him as God's Messenger. ALUSI-FULL (الطيالسي، الحارث، أبو نعيم): Reports in the Musnads of al-Tayalisi and al-Harith and in Abu Nuaym say Gabriel and Michael split Muhammad's chest and washed it before Gabriel told him to read the opening revelation.; cites 96:1"}, {"id": "96:1/q23/p4", "position": "A voice called in solitude before the opening of al-Fātiḥa in one account.", "reasons": "Al-Thaʿlabī's Abū Maysara report has a voice in solitude, Khadīja's reassurance, Waraqa's instruction to listen, and a recitation of al-Fātiḥa with the basmala and profession of oneness."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q24", "question": "How did Khadīja and Waraqa respond to the first encounter?", "turns_on": "Their reported words and identifications.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q24/p1", "position": "Khadīja comforted Muhammad by citing his truthful, generous, faithful conduct.", "reasons": "Khadīja says God would never disgrace a man who keeps kinship, tells truth, bears burdens, hosts guests, helps the needy, and supports people in trouble; the details vary slightly across ʿĀʾisha's transmissions. DURR (عبد الله بن شداد): In the same report, Khadīja denies that God would harm Muhammad, while Waraqa predicts his prophethood, hardship from his people, and Waraqa’s own belief if he lives. DURR (خديجة): Khadīja reassured the frightened Prophet that God would never disgrace him, citing his kinship care, support of the needy, hospitality, and aid in hardship. DURR-FULL (خديجة): Khadija reassures the frightened Prophet that God will never disgrace him because he maintains kinship, bears burdens, helps the destitute, hosts guests, and supports just causes. DURR-FULL (عبد الله بن شداد): His account says Gabriel pressed Muhammad, recited the opening through ‘what he did not know,’ and later revelation paused; the descent of al-Duha answered Khadija's worry that God had abandoned him.; cites 93:1 QUTB-ZILAL (خديجة): Khadija comforts the frightened Prophet, assuring him God will never disgrace him because he keeps kinship, speaks truth, bears others' burdens, hosts guests, and helps in crises. BINTSHATI (عائشة أم المؤمنين): Aisha continues that Muhammad saw Gabriel in the sky, returned to Khadija, and was reassured because his character included kinship, truthfulness, trustworthiness, hospitality, and helping in adversity; no grading is stated."}, {"id": "96:1/q24/p2", "position": "Waraqa identified Gabriel as Moses's angel, foretold opposition and expulsion, and pledged support.", "reasons": "Waraqa calls the visitor the angel sent to Moses, predicts Muhammad will be opposed and expelled, and promises support if alive; Ibn Kathīr adds Waraqa's Christian learning and written Gospel material. DURR (عبد الله بن شداد): In the same report, Khadīja denies that God would harm Muhammad, while Waraqa predicts his prophethood, hardship from his people, and Waraqa’s own belief if he lives. DURR (ورقة بن نوفل): Waraqa identified the visitor as the same heavenly messenger sent to Moses, predicted that Muhammad’s people would expel him, and promised to support him if alive. DURR-FULL (ورقة بن نوفل): Waraqa identifies the visitor as the same Namus sent to Moses, predicts the Prophet's people will expel him, and promises support if he lives to that day. QUTB-ZILAL (ورقة بن نوفل): After hearing the account, Waraka identifies the angel as the same messenger sent to Moses and says the Prophet will be driven out; those bringing such a message are opposed, and he promises support. BINTSHATI (ورقة بن نوفل): After hearing Muhammad’s account, Waraqa identifies him as the prophet of this community and bearer of th
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
