<<chunk 254, part 3 of 0..5>>
rst five verses came at the start; the remainder came after public opposition and were joined to the surah by God’s command. BINTSHATI: The reports in al-Tabari and the Prophetic biography stop the first-revelation account at verse five, supporting the view that the opening alone was first revealed. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (some people): One reported view makes the whole of Sūrah al-‘Alaq the Qur’an’s first revelation; the majority instead regards its first five verses as first, based on a report in Bukhārī and Muslim. IBNASHUR-FULL: The surah is Meccan by agreement and was the first revealed; its first five verses came in Hira during Ramadan on the seventeenth, year forty after the Elephant, according to sound Aisha reports and most exegetes.; cites 96:5"}, {"id": "96:1/q21/p2", "position": "The entire sūra is treated as one first revelation.", "reasons": "ISLAHI-TADABBUR (some people): One reported view makes the whole of Sūrah al-‘Alaq the Qur’an’s first revelation; the majority instead regards its first five verses as first, based on a report in Bukhārī and Muslim. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The author considers al-‘Alaq a coherent, single unit: its first five verses share the rest’s severe tone, and nothing in it indicates revelation in two episodes. Against—ITQAN (ابن هشام): Ibn Hisham notes that the first five verses of al-ʿAlaq were the earliest revelation, then kallā opened a new statement, which challenges the rebuke-only reading."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q22", "question": "When and where was the first revelation given?", "turns_on": "Reports locate it at Ḥirāʾ and differ or specify its Ramadan date.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q22/p1", "position": "In the cave or retreat at Ḥirāʾ.", "reasons": "The recurring ʿĀʾisha report describes truthful dreams, repeated retreat at Ḥirāʾ, and Khadīja provisioning him; Ibn ʿAṭiyya and Abū Ḥayyān invoke Bukhārī's sound report. DURR (الزهري وعمرو بن دينار): Al-Zuhrī and ʿAmr b. Dīnār report that, at Ḥirāʾ, an angel brought the Prophet brocade bearing the opening five verses in writing. DURR (عمرو بن جابر): ʿAmr b. Jābir likewise reports that an angel came to the Prophet at Ḥirāʾ with brocade inscribed through “what he did not know.” DURR (عبد الله بن شداد): ʿAbd Allāh b. Shaddād recounts Gabriel’s repeated command to recite and squeezing of Muhammad, who then received the opening passage through 96:5. DURR (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha’s account begins with true dreams that came like dawn, followed by the Prophet’s love of seclusion and repeated retreat to Ḥirāʾ. DURR (عائشة): In ʿĀʾisha’s account, Gabriel commanded the unlettered Prophet to recite, squeezed him three times, then delivered the opening five verses at Ḥirāʾ. DURR-FULL (ابن شهاب): Scholars he cites say the opening through ‘what he did not know’ was revealed at Hira and the rest came later. DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha's account describes true dreams and retreat at Hira before Gabriel commands him to read, presses him three times, and recites the first five verses; Muhammad returns trembling to Khadija. DURR-FULL (الزهري وعمرو بن دينار): They report that at Hira an angel brought a brocade cloth inscribed with the first revelation through ‘what he did not know.’ DURR-FULL (عمرو بن جابر): He transmits the same report of an angel at Hira bringing the opening passage written on brocade. DURR-FULL (عبد الله بن شداد): His account says Gabriel pressed Muhammad, recited the opening through ‘what he did not know,’ and later revelation paused; the descent of al-Duha answered Khadija's worry that God had abandoned him.; cites 93:1 DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha relates the Prophet's retreat with Khadija, encounter with Gabriel and Michael, opening of his belly and chest, then command to read; he retained the verses thereafter. ITQAN: Of the reports about the first revelation, the soundest view is that it began with اقرأ باسم ربك; Aisha’s report in the two Sahih collections recounts the true dreams, retreat at Hira, and Gabriel’s three commands to read through ما لم يعلم.; cites 96:1, 96:5 ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd b. ʿUmayr says Gabriel brought the Prophet a silk sheet and told him to recite; he identifies the opening of al-ʿAlaq as the first sura sent down. ITQAN (الزهري): Al-Zuhrī recounts that while the Prophet was at Ḥirāʾ, an angel brought a silk sheet inscribed with the opening verses of al-ʿAlaq. ALUSI (عائشة): Another view, supported by ʿĀʾisha's account of the beginning of revelation, says only the opening passage through mā lam yaʿlam came first at Ḥirāʾ, with the rest revealed later.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI (عائشة): In the beginning-of-revelation report, the angel squeezed the Prophet three times, then recited the opening verses through the command to teach what was not known; the report is transmitted by Aḥmad and both Ṣaḥīḥ compilers.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI: An account says Gabriel came to the Prophet at Ḥirāʾ with silk brocade bearing the opening verses; he asked him to read, and the Prophet replied that he could not read.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI-FULL (الطيالسي، الحارث، أبو نعيم): Reports in the Musnads of al-Tayalisi and al-Harith and in Abu Nuaym say Gabriel and Michael split Muhammad's chest and washed it before Gabriel told him to read the opening revelation.; cites 96:1 ALUSI-FULL (أبو رجاء العطاردي): Many say Iqra was the first revelation; Abu Musa's student Abu Raja reports that Abu Musa called it the first surah sent to Muhammad. ALUSI-FULL (عائشة): Al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi authenticate a report from Aisha likewise identifying Iqra as first; Mujahid says it was followed by Nun and the pen. QUTB-ZILAL (عائشة): In the report Qutb says is recorded in both Sahih collections, Aisha recounts true dreams preceding revelation, solitary worship at Hira, Gabriel's three commands to read, and the first five verses. QUTB-ZILAL (عبد الله بن الزبير): Al-Tabari's report from Ibn al-Zubayr recounts the Prophet's alternate account: an angel brought written silk during sleep, recited the opening passage, and left it inscribed in his heart; later Gabriel appeared in the sky and identified himself. IBNASHUR (عائشة): Aisha's report is Ibn Ashur's basis for identifying these five verses as the first revelation to Muhammad in Hira. IBNASHUR (عائشة): Aisha's report in the two Sahih collections describes Gabriel pressing the Prophet three times; each time he answered that he could not read, and at the third command Gabriel recited the opening verses through “what he did not know.” IBNASHUR (عائشة، أبو موسى الأشعري): Sound reports from Aisha establish that these first five verses were first, delivered to Muhammad in Hira on Ramadan 17, year 40 after the Elephant; Abu Musa and most exegetes agree. IBNASHUR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha narrates in the two Sahihs that Gabriel came to Muhammad in Hira, commanded him three times, embraced him forcefully each time, then recited the opening through 'what he did not know.' BINTSHATI (عائشة أم المؤمنين): Aisha recounts Muhammad’s true dreams, retreat to Hira, Gabriel’s command and three embraces, and the recitation of the opening five verses, which remained fixed in his heart; no grading is stated. BINTSHATI: For the solitary seeker at Hira, the first revealed words guided him to the truth he sought and ended his long uncertainty like a new dawn. IBNASHUR-FULL: The surah is Meccan by agreement and was the first revealed; its first five verses came in Hira during Ramadan on the seventeenth, year forty after the Elephant, according to sound Aisha reports and most exegetes.; cites 96:5"}, {"id": "96:1/q22/p2", "position": "At Ḥirāʾ on Ramadan 17 in the fortieth year after the Elephant.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR (عائشة، أبو موسى الأشعري): Sound reports from Aisha establish that these first five verses were first, delivered to Muhammad in Hira on Ramadan 17, year 40 after the Elephant; Abu Musa and most exegetes agree. IBNASHUR-FULL: The surah is Meccan by agreement and was the first revealed; its first five verses came in Hira during Ramadan on the seventeenth, year forty after the Elephant, according to sound Aisha reports and most exegetes.; cites 96:5"}, {"id": "96:1/q22/p3", "position": "In Ramadan, after preparatory true dreams.", "reasons": "Ibn Hishām's ʿUbayd report says Muhammad secluded himself annually at Ḥirāʾ in Ramadan, fed the poor, and circumambulated the Kaʿba on returning."}]}
{"id": "96:1/q23", "question": "What happened when Gabriel first brought the command?", "turns_on": "The accounts' details about dreams, repeated embraces, cloth, chest opening, and recitation.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q23/p1", "position": "Gabriel commanded reading three times, pressed Muhammad, then recited the opening verses.", "reasons": "ʿĀʾisha's report has Gabriel pressing Muhammad three times after each reply that he could not read, then giving the verses. Ibn Hishām adds that he awoke with them fixed in his heart; al-Qushayrī gives two replies before instruction. DURR (عبد الله بن شداد): ʿAbd Allāh b. Shaddād recounts Gabriel’s repeated command to recite and squeezing of Muhammad, who then received the opening passage through 96:5. DURR (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha’s account begins with true dreams that came like dawn, followed by the Prophet’s love of seclusion and repeated retreat to Ḥirāʾ. DURR (عائشة): In ʿĀʾisha’s account, Gabriel commanded the unlettered Prophet to recite, squeezed him three times, then delivered the opening five verses at Ḥirāʾ. DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha's account describes true dreams and retreat at Hira before Gabriel commands him to read, presses him three times, and recites the first five verses; Muhammad returns trembling to Khadija. DURR-FULL (عبد الله بن شداد): His account says Gabriel pressed Muhammad, recited the opening through ‘what he did not know,’ and later revelation paused; the descent of al-Duha answered Khadija's worry that God had abandoned him.; cites 93:1 DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم):
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
