<<chunk 254, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "96:1/q20", "question": "What was the first Qurʾānic revelation?", "turns_on": "The competing reports, and whether 'first' means first verses, complete sūra, public warning, or after a pause.", "positions": [{"id": "96:1/q20/p1", "position": "The opening of al-ʿAlaq began revelation.", "reasons": "Aisha's true-dream, Ḥirāʾ, and three-embrace report is transmitted in both Ṣaḥīḥs according to al-Qurṭubī and Ibn Kathīr; al-Wāḥidī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya prefer it. Al-Burhān cites authenticated Aisha and Abū Rajāʾ reports; Muslim's version extends to 96:5, Bukhārī's abbreviated version to 96:3. BURHAN (بعضهم): Another distinction says اقرأ باسم ربك was first for prophethood, while يا أيها المدثر was first for messengership, since the latter commands a general public warning.; cites 74:1 BURHAN (مجاهد): Mujāhid says the first sūra revealed was اقرأ, followed by Nūḥ.; cites 71:1 BIQAI: While the Prophet was devoted to solitude at Ḥirāʾ, Gabriel came with the first five verses of this sūra, ending with the phrase about what he did not know. BIQAI-FULL: The active verb is placed before its prepositional phrase because this is more forceful, especially in the first revelation, where the command to read is paramount. DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that “Read in the name of your Lord” was the first Qurʾān revealed in Mecca. DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās separately reports that this was the first sūra revealed to Muhammad. DURR (مجاهد): Mujāhid says Sūrat al-ʿAlaq was the first revelation, followed by “Nūn wa-l-qalam.” DURR (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the first revelation consisted of five verses, ending with “what he did not know.” DURR (عبيد بن عمير): ʿUbayd b. ʿUmayr says al-ʿAlaq was first, followed by Sūrat Nūn. DURR (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha says the sūras revealed after al-ʿAlaq included Nūn wa-l-qalam, al-Muddaththir, and al-Ḍuḥā.; cites 68:1, 74:1, 93:1 DURR (أبو موسى الأشعري): Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī says Sūrat Iqraʾ was the first sūra sent down to Muhammad. DURR (بعض علمائهم): Scholars heard by Muḥammad b. ʿAbbād said the opening through 96:5 was revealed at Ḥirāʾ; the sūra’s ending came later as God willed. DURR (عائشة): ʿĀʾisha says this was the first Qurʾānic revelation; al-Ḥākim and al-Bayhaqī are both said to have authenticated this report. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): He says the first Qur'an revelation in Mecca was ‘Read in the name of your Lord who created.’ DURR-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري): He says ‘Read in the name of your Lord’ was the first sura revealed to Muhammad; al-Hakim authenticated the report. DURR-FULL (ابن شهاب): Scholars he cites say the opening through ‘what he did not know’ was revealed at Hira and the rest came later. DURR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha says the first revelation was ‘Read in the name of your Lord who created.’ DURR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha's account describes true dreams and retreat at Hira before Gabriel commands him to read, presses him three times, and recites the first five verses; Muhammad returns trembling to Khadija. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): He says ‘Read in the name of your Lord who created’ was the first sura revealed to Muhammad. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): He says the first revelation was ‘Read in the name of your Lord,’ followed by Nun and the Pen.; cites 68:1 DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): He identifies the first thing revealed as five verses, from ‘Read in the name of your Lord’ through ‘what he did not know.’ DURR-FULL (عبيد بن عمير): He says ‘Read in the name of your Lord’ came first, followed by Nun.; cites 68:1 DURR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha reports that after ‘Read in the name of your Lord,’ revelations included Nun and the Pen, al-Muddaththir, and al-Duha.; cites 68:1, 74:1, 93:1 DURR-FULL (عبد الله بن شداد): His account says Gabriel pressed Muhammad, recited the opening through ‘what he did not know,’ and later revelation paused; the descent of al-Duha answered Khadija's worry that God had abandoned him.; cites 93:1 ITQAN: Of the reports about the first revelation, the soundest view is that it began with اقرأ باسم ربك; Aisha’s report in the two Sahih collections recounts the true dreams, retreat at Hira, and Gabriel’s three commands to read through ما لم يعلم.; cites 96:1, 96:5 ITQAN (عائشة): Al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi authenticate Aisha’s report that اقرأ باسم ربك was the first surah revealed. ITQAN (أبو رجاء العطاردي): Al-Tabarani transmits with a chain meeting the soundness standard Abu Raja’s report that Abu Musa called this the first surah sent to Muhammad. ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd ibn Umayr reports that Gabriel instructed the Prophet to read and then recited اقرأ باسم ربك, which the Prophet called the first revelation. ITQAN (مجاهد): Mujahid says the first revelation included both اقرأ باسم ربك and ن والقلم, an alternative to the preferred report that begins with اقرأ.; cites 68:1 ITQAN (عبيد بن عمير): Ubayd b. ʿUmayr says Gabriel brought the Prophet a silk sheet and told him to recite; he identifies the opening of al-ʿAlaq as the first sura sent down. ITQAN: One reconciliation distinguishes the first complete sura, al-Muddaththir, from the first verses revealed, the beginning of al-ʿAlaq. ITQAN: A second authentic report places al-Muddaththir after the pause in revelation: the Prophet saw the same angel previously encountered at Ḥirāʾ, showing the Ḥirāʾ revelation came earlier. ITQAN: The final reconciliation says al-ʿAlaq was first for prophethood, while al-Muddaththir was first for the mission and command to warn. ITQAN (ابن حجر): Ibn Hajar distinguishes the first revelation prompted by an earlier event—the Prophet's fright and covering himself—from “Read,” which was revealed initially without a prior cause.; cites 74:1 ITQAN (الكرماني): Al-Kirmani argues that Jabir inferred his view rather than narrating it, so Aisha's transmitted report should take precedence. BURSEVI: Iqra is a command, repeated to reinforce the obligation and introduce a new sentence about the most generous Lord; a permissible pause follows خلق because the Prophet had objected that he could not read. ALUSI (عائشة): Another view, supported by ʿĀʾisha's account of the beginning of revelation, says only the opening passage through mā lam yaʿlam came first at Ḥirāʾ, with the rest revealed later.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI (عائشة): In the beginning-of-revelation report, the angel squeezed the Prophet three times, then recited the opening verses through the command to teach what was not known; the report is transmitted by Aḥmad and both Ṣaḥīḥ compilers.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI: The wording about the interruption and renewed revelation shows why Jābir's report does not establish al-Muddaththir as first overall: it was first after the pause. ALUSI: Al-Ālūsī's chosen view is that the opening of this sūra was the first Qurʾānic revelation overall, supported by ʿĀʾisha's especially sound report.; cites 96:1, 96:2, 96:3, 96:4, 96:5 ALUSI (النووي): Al-Nawawī says mā in the Prophet's response mā anā bi-qāriʾ is a negation, which fits a first command; otherwise refusing to read after prior instruction would be a grave sin. ALUSI (صاحب الكشف): Al-Kashf reconciles Jābir's report by taking his claim to mean the first complete sūra, while al-Muddaththir was first after the interval. ALUSI (صاحب شرح صحيح مسلم): The commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim says Iqraʾ was first absolutely and al-Muddaththir first after the pause; it calls the Fātiḥa-first view clearly invalid. ALUSI: Commentators disagree about which revelation came first; many say this sūra was first. ALUSI (أبو رجاء العطاردي): Al-Ṭabarānī reports with a chain meeting the soundness criterion from Abū Rajāʾ al-ʿUṭāridī that Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī said Iqraʾ was the first sūra revealed to Muhammad. ALUSI (عائشة): Al-Ḥākim and al-Bayhaqī authenticated a report from ʿĀʾisha giving the same account that Iqraʾ was first. ALUSI (مجاهد): Mujāhid says the first revelations were Iqraʾ bi-smi rabbik followed by Nūn wa-l-qalam. ALUSI-FULL (أبو رجاء العطاردي): Many say Iqra was the first revelation; Abu Musa's student Abu Raja reports that Abu Musa called it the first surah sent to Muhammad. ALUSI-FULL (عائشة): Al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi authenticate a report from Aisha likewise identifying Iqra as first; Mujahid says it was followed by Nun and the pen. ALUSI-FULL: Another view holds that only the opening of Iqra through what he did not know was revealed first and the remainder came later, as suggested by Aisha's account of the first revelation. ALUSI-FULL (عائشة): Aisha’s account says revelation paused soon after the opening verses; a report from Jabir then recounts how revelation resumed with al-Muddaththir. ALUSI-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): Jabir's account of Muddaththir explicitly concerns the period after revelation paused and then resumed, undermining its use as the first revelation overall. ALUSI-FULL: Al-Alusi follows the view that the opening of Iqra was the first revelation outright, supported by Aisha's highly authentic report; ما أنا بقارئ is a statement of inability, not refusal, which would otherwise be grave disobedience. ALUSI-FULL (الكشف): Al-Kashf takes Jabir's claim to concern the first complete surah, while Sahih Muslim's commentary distinguishes Iqra as first overall from Muddaththir as first after the hiatus; the claim that al-Fatiha came first is plainly false. QUTB-ZILAL: Qutb says the sura's opening was the first revelation by consensus; accounts assigning that primacy elsewhere are unreliable. QUTB-ZILAL: Only the opening passage dates to the first revelation; the sura's later portions refer to the Prophet's subsequent preaching, public worship, and pagan opposition, yet form a coherent ordered whole. QUTB-ZILAL: As the Qur'an's first sura, it begins with God and directs the Prophet at the first heavenly contact and first step of his mission to read in God's name, beginning with the Creator. QUTB-ZILAL (عائشة): In the report Qutb says is recorded in both Sahih collections, Aisha recounts true dreams preceding revelation, solitary worship at Hir
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
