<<chunk 254, part 1 of 0..5>>
a, Gabriel's three commands to read, and the first five verses. QUTB-ZILAL (عبد الله بن الزبير): Al-Tabari's report from Ibn al-Zubayr recounts the Prophet's alternate account: an angel brought written silk during sleep, recited the opening passage, and left it inscribed in his heart; later Gabriel appeared in the sky and identified himself. IBNASHUR (عائشة): Aisha's report is Ibn Ashur's basis for identifying these five verses as the first revelation to Muhammad in Hira. IBNASHUR (عائشة، أبو موسى الأشعري): Sound reports from Aisha establish that these first five verses were first, delivered to Muhammad in Hira on Ramadan 17, year 40 after the Elephant; Abu Musa and most exegetes agree. IBNASHUR: These are the final verses of the five that were first revealed to Muhammad in the cave of Hira. IBNASHUR-FULL: This is the first Qur'an revealed to Muhammad, as established in the forthcoming report from Aisha. IBNASHUR-FULL: These are the final five verses of the passage first revealed at Hira; the following discussion on verses 6–10 begins a new subject. TABATABAI: The wording supports this being the first revelation and implies an omitted object, ‘the Qur’an’ or its equivalent. BINTSHATI: She presents the surah’s opening as the first revelation, noting that Ibn Ishaq and al-Tabari report no disagreement about that account. BINTSHATI (عائشة أم المؤمنين): Aisha recounts Muhammad’s true dreams, retreat to Hira, Gabriel’s command and three embraces, and the recitation of the opening five verses, which remained fixed in his heart; no grading is stated. BINTSHATI (أبو حيان): Al-Bahr al-Muhit says the surah is Meccan and its opening was the first revelation at Hira, as established in Bukhari and elsewhere; it judges the claims that al-Muddaththir or the Fatiha came first unsound. BINTSHATI: The reports in al-Tabari and the Prophetic biography stop the first-revelation account at verse five, supporting the view that the opening alone was first revealed. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (some people): One reported view makes the whole of Sūrah al-‘Alaq the Qur’an’s first revelation; the majority instead regards its first five verses as first, based on a report in Bukhārī and Muslim. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: These were the first revelation; the command to read addresses Muhammad and all Muslims, and its repetition stresses the importance of reading and knowledge, through which humans are distinguished among living things.; cites 2:31 IBNASHUR-FULL: The surah is Meccan by agreement and was the first revealed; its first five verses came in Hira during Ramadan on the seventeenth, year forty after the Elephant, according to sound Aisha reports and most exegetes.; cites 96:5 Al-Ālūsī reports that ʿĀʾisha's identification of the opening of al-ʿAlaq as the first revelation occurs in both Ṣaḥīḥs and is followed by most authorities; the competing report from Jābir is also sound and calls for reconciliation."}, {"id": "96:1/q20/p2", "position": "Al-Fātiḥa was first.", "reasons": "Abū Maysara's report is cited by Ibn ʿAṭiyya and al-Qurṭubī; al-Kashshāf and al-Nasafī attribute this to a majority. Jishumī rejects it as contrary to consensus; Abū Ḥayyān judges the report unsound. ALUSI (صاحب شرح صحيح مسلم): The commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim says Iqraʾ was first absolutely and al-Muddaththir first after the pause; it calls the Fātiḥa-first view clearly invalid. ALUSI (أبو ميسرة عمرو بن شرحبيل): A mursal report with trustworthy narrators, transmitted by al-Bayhaqī and al-Wāḥidī, supports the view that al-Fātiḥa came first. BINTSHATI (الزمخشري والفخر الرازي): An alternative view in al-Kashshaf and al-Razi’s commentary makes the Fatiha the first revealed surah, followed by al-Alaq. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (Zamakhsharī): Zamakhsharī records the view that al-Fātiḥah was revealed first and then Sūrah al-Qalam; exegetes both accept and dispute it. Against—ALUSI: The Fātiḥa-first report could describe what was revealed after Iqraʾ and al-Muddaththir, and the reports supporting the other order are stronger. Against—ALUSI-FULL (أبو ميسرة عمرو بن شرحبيل): A trustworthy-transmitters but mursal report argues that al-Fatiha came first; the response is that it could refer to what followed Iqra and Muddaththir, and other reports are stronger. Against—ALUSI-FULL (الكشف): Al-Kashf takes Jabir's claim to concern the first complete surah, while Sahih Muslim's commentary distinguishes Iqra as first overall from Muddaththir as first after the hiatus; the claim that al-Fatiha came first is plainly false. Against—QUTB-ZILAL: Qutb says the sura's opening was the first revelation by consensus; accounts assigning that primacy elsewhere are unreliable. Against—BINTSHATI (أبو حيان): Al-Bahr al-Muhit says the surah is Meccan and its opening was the first revelation at Hira, as established in Bukhari and elsewhere; it judges the claims that al-Muddaththir or the Fatiha came first unsound."}, {"id": "96:1/q20/p3", "position": "Al-Muddaththir was first.", "reasons": "Jābir's report is cited by Ibn ʿAṭiyya and al-Qurṭubī; al-Wāḥidī answers that Jābir knew the later encounter after the pause. ALUSI (جابر بن عبد الله): Relating the pause in revelation, Jābir says the angel appeared seated between heaven and earth; the Prophet returned frightened, and God then revealed al-Muddaththir. ALUSI (صاحب الكشف): Al-Kashf reconciles Jābir's report by taking his claim to mean the first complete sūra, while al-Muddaththir was first after the interval. ALUSI (جابر بن عبد الله): In a report in both Ṣaḥīḥ collections, Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh answers that Yā ayyuhā al-muddaththir was first; he responds to those who cite Iqraʾ by narrating the Prophet's account. ALUSI-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): A report from Jabir calls Ya ayyuhal-Muddaththir the first revelation, but the earlier group offers several responses to it. ALUSI-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): Jabir's account of Muddaththir explicitly concerns the period after revelation paused and then resumed, undermining its use as the first revelation overall. ALUSI-FULL (الكشف): Al-Kashf takes Jabir's claim to concern the first complete surah, while Sahih Muslim's commentary distinguishes Iqra as first overall from Muddaththir as first after the hiatus; the claim that al-Fatiha came first is plainly false. IBNASHUR (جابر): Jabir reports that al-Muddaththir was the first surah revealed. IBNASHUR: Ibn Ashur reconciles Jabir's report by taking al-Muddaththir as the first surah after the interruption in revelation, just as al-Duha followed a second interruption, as al-Itqan explains. IBNASHUR-FULL (جابر): Jabir says al-Muddaththir was first; Ibn Ashur reconciles this as the first revelation after the pause, like al-Duha after the second pause. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (the proponents of this view): A third view says Sūrah al-Muddaththir was first; its proponents probably mean only its opening verses because the rest has a severity resembling al-‘Alaq. Against—ITQAN (الكرماني): Al-Kirmani argues that Jabir inferred his view rather than narrating it, so Aisha's transmitted report should take precedence. Against—QUTB-ZILAL: Qutb says the sura's opening was the first revelation by consensus; accounts assigning that primacy elsewhere are unreliable. Against—BINTSHATI (أبو حيان): Al-Bahr al-Muhit says the surah is Meccan and its opening was the first revelation at Hira, as established in Bukhari and elsewhere; it judges the claims that al-Muddaththir or the Fatiha came first unsound. Al-Ālūsī reports Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh's sound narration: after retreat at Ḥirāʾ and the angel's sudden appearance, Muhammad returned frightened and al-Muddaththir was revealed, which Jābir takes to imply its priority over al-ʿAlaq."}, {"id": "96:1/q20/p4", "position": "The reports use 'first' for different stages: al-ʿAlaq first verses, al-Muddaththir after a pause or first public warning, and al-Fātiḥa as a complete sūra.", "reasons": "Al-Wāḥidī says al-Muddaththir was first after Iqraʾ and its pause. Al-Burhān's Qāḍī Abū Bakr distinguishes first verses, first public command, and first complete sūra; Ibn Ḥibbān locates the later revelation in Khadīja's house. BURHAN: The distinction resembles reports that prayer is the first duty reckoned and bloodshed the first dispute judged: each is first within a different category. BURHAN (بعضهم): Another distinction says اقرأ باسم ربك was first for prophethood, while يا أيها المدثر was first for messengership, since the latter commands a general public warning.; cites 74:1 DURR (جابر بن عبد الله الأنصاري): Jābir recounts the resumed revelation: Gabriel appeared seated between heaven and earth, and God sent the opening of Sūrat al-Muddaththir; revelation then intensified.; cites 74:1, 74:2, 74:3, 74:4, 74:5 ITQAN: One reconciliation distinguishes the first complete sura, al-Muddaththir, from the first verses revealed, the beginning of al-ʿAlaq. ITQAN: A second authentic report places al-Muddaththir after the pause in revelation: the Prophet saw the same angel previously encountered at Ḥirāʾ, showing the Ḥirāʾ revelation came earlier. ITQAN: The final reconciliation says al-ʿAlaq was first for prophethood, while al-Muddaththir was first for the mission and command to warn. ITQAN (ابن حجر): Ibn Hajar distinguishes the first revelation prompted by an earlier event—the Prophet's fright and covering himself—from “Read,” which was revealed initially without a prior cause.; cites 74:1 ITQAN (الكرماني): Al-Kirmani argues that Jabir inferred his view rather than narrating it, so Aisha's transmitted report should take precedence. ALUSI: The wording about the interruption and renewed revelation shows why Jābir's report does not establish al-Muddaththir as first overall: it was first after the pause. ALUSI (صاحب الكشف): Al-Kashf reconciles Jābir's report by taking his claim to mean the first complete sūra, while al-Muddaththir was first after the interval. ALUSI (صاحب شرح صحيح مسلم): The commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim says Iqraʾ was first absolutely and al-Muddaththir first after the pause; it calls th
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
