<<chunk 3, part 2 of 0..3>>
tive adverb, or redundant word, contrary to claims that it has those uses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Making idh depend on khalaqakum from the earlier command requires a redundant wāw and separates the governor from it with long, syntactically independent verses. SAMIN-DURR (author): A proposal links إذ to خلقكم in 4:1 and calls the wāw redundant, but the author dismisses it because of the long distance."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p2", "position": "An implied command to remember governs idh", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): The governing verb for idh is omitted, with the primary estimate wa-udhkur idh, remember when. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الجمهور): The majority reject redundancy and connect idh to an implied command: “remember when your Lord said.” TABRISI (علي بن عيسى): Ali ibn Isa supplies the omitted command اذكر, making إذ its accusative object. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi's preferred analysis makes إذ accusative through an implied اذكر: remember that your Lord said this to the angels; the omission is clear from context. NASAFI-FULL (author): إذ is governed by an omitted imperative, اذكر, meaning recall the story. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī, Ibn ʿAṭiyya, and others permit construing idh as an object of udhkur, though Abū Ḥayyān rejects that analysis. BURSEVI (author): Wa-idh is the object of an omitted imperative, 'remember'; commanding recollection of the time also requires remembering its events and details. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Some parse idh as an object of an unspoken udhkur, but this wrongly removes it from its temporal-adverbial function. SAMIN-DURR (author): One proposal governs إذ by an implied اذكر; the author has already rejected making إذ itself a direct object."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p3", "position": "The following qālū governs idh", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): إذ is accusative with an implied اذكر, though it can also be governed by قالوا. RAZI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf also allows إذ to be governed by قالوا. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The عامل for إذ may be قالوا, اذكر understood as in its many explicit Qur’anic uses, or an implicit phrase from the preceding verse; on the last analysis this clause coordinates with خلق لكم within its relative clause. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He prefers governing idh with qālū: when God says He will place a khalifa, the angels respond, Would You place one there who corrupts? This is clear temporal usage. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He reiterates that the preferred governor of idh is qālū, with the following clause أتجعل as its governed complement. SAMIN-DURR (author): قالوا governs إذ قال ربك, which al-Samīn identifies as the preferred parsing. SAMIN-DURR (author): Of nine analyses of إذ, the best and simplest makes it governed by قالوا أتجعل فيها: the angels said this at the time God said إني جاعل في الأرض خليفة. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Ālūsī judges several proposed parses false or strained and favors making idh accusative through the following qālū, whose relation to it is clear. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Idh cannot be governed by the following qāla because idh is annexed to that clause, and an annexed complement cannot govern its annexer."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p4", "position": "Idh has the sense qad", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Idh means qad: the Lord had said this. ITQAN (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda and Ibn Qutayba treat some Qur'anic instances of إذ as emphatic, equivalent to qad, including وإذ قال ربك للملائكة. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): An alternative reads idh as qad, yielding wa-qad qāla rabbuka, but Abū Ḥayyān rejects it."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p5", "position": "Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari discusses meaningful idh and ellipsis, rejecting its redundancy with Arabic poetry and linking it to an implied remembrance of Adam after 2:28–29."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p6", "position": "The waw of ونحن is circumstantial, also called the waw of interruption, resumption, or inception; the implied relation is إذ نحن.", "reasons": "TABRISI (سيبويه): The waw of ونحن is circumstantial, also called the waw of interruption, resumption, or inception; the implied relation is إذ نحن."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p7", "position": "إذ marks a past time in which another event occurred, while إذا marks a future time; both are annexed to clauses, built like relative forms, used causally or conditionally, and always adverbial because they are nondeclinable.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): إذ marks a past time in which another event occurred, while إذا marks a future time; both are annexed to clauses, built like relative forms, used causally or conditionally, and always adverbial because they are nondeclinable."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p8", "position": "Idh is a built temporal noun for past time, built because it resembles a particle in form or need.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Idh is a built temporal noun for past time, built because it resembles a particle in form or need."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p9", "position": "After idh comes a nominal or verbal clause; with a verbal clause, fronting its subject and annexing idh to a present-initial clause are poor usage.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): After idh comes a nominal or verbal clause; with a verbal clause, fronting its subject and annexing idh to a present-initial clause are poor usage."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p10", "position": "A present verb governed by idh is made past in meaning; idh remains adverbial unless another time noun is annexed to it.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A present verb governed by idh is made past in meaning; idh remains adverbial unless another time noun is annexed to it."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p11", "position": "An implied beginning of creation governs idh", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Some make idh nominative as the beginning of creation; others make it accusative as the beginning of creation occurred when God spoke."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p12", "position": "General rule: open إن when its clause can replace a verbal noun; close it when it cannot, such as after قول, initially, in a relative clause or circumstantial clause. Both are possible when substitution is ambiguous,", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): General rule: open إن when its clause can replace a verbal noun; close it when it cannot, such as after قول, initially, in a relative clause or circumstantial clause. Both are possible when substitution is ambiguous, such as after فاء الجزاء or إذا الفجائية."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p13", "position": "إذ is a past-time adverb that shifts a present verb into the past, is indeclinable because it resembles a particle in form and dependence, and may be followed by clauses; fronting a noun before the verb", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): إذ is a past-time adverb that shifts a present verb into the past, is indeclinable because it resembles a particle in form and dependence, and may be followed by clauses; fronting a noun before the verb in a verbal clause is awkward."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p14", "position": "When the clause governed by إذ is omitted and understood, tanwin compensates for it and kasra avoids two sukuns rather than marking inflection; the author rejects al-Akhfash's alternative.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): When the clause governed by إذ is omitted and understood, tanwin compensates for it and kasra avoids two sukuns rather than marking inflection; the author rejects al-Akhfash's alternative."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p15", "position": "Idh is a past-time adverb, indeclinable because of its particle-like form and dependence; its clause is verbal or nominal, with time inferred from its predicate or context.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Idh is a past-time adverb, indeclinable because of its particle-like form and dependence; its clause is verbal or nominal, with time inferred from its predicate or context."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p16", "position": "Idh is a time noun for a past relation concurrent with another past relation; because its time is vague, it is always annexed to a clarifying clause.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Idh is a time noun for a past relation concurrent with another past relation; because its time is vague, it is always annexed to a clarifying clause."}, {"id": "2:30/q03/p17", "position": "Idh usually functions as an adverbial accusative governed by the verb, but al-Zamakhsharī 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
