<<chunk 4, part 0 of 0..2>>
{"id": "2:30/q06", "question": "What is the origin and form of malāʾika?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q06/p1", "position": "Malak is connected with words for sending a message", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malak and malaika from the language of message, discussing hamza movement, plurals and cited Arabic poetry. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari derives malaika from message, since angels carry God's messages, citing alikni. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatadah says God knew this khalifa's line would include messengers, prophets, righteous people, and people who would dwell in the Garden. THALABI (author): Malak means messenger; the singular is malak, from malik, and the plural is malaika, from terms for message or messenger. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Malāʾika is the plural of malak, connected to message; alaka means “send me.” JISHUMI (author): Malak derives from the language of sending a message: alīkni means send me, and maʾlaka or alūk means message; the original hamza was dropped for ease. JISHUMI (author): Malak has the pattern mafʿal after deletion of its hamza and became the established name for a class of God’s nonhuman messengers. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Malak derives from ma'lak, from words meaning message; the hamza shifted after the lam, then was dropped for ease of frequent use and its vowel moved to the lam. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A poetic line preserves the word malʾak in its original form, supporting the underlying hamza analysis. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Another etymology derives malak from maʾlak, from alaka, “to send,” and parses malāʾika as its plural. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عدي بن زيد): The poet ʿAdī ibn Zayd uses maʾlakan as evidence for the alternative derivation of malak. TABRISI (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda derives the word from لأك, “to send”; ملأك and ملائكة are then unaltered forms with an extra initial mīm. TABRISI (ابن كيسان): Ibn Kaysan derives it from الملك: ملأك is فعال like شمأل, ملائكة is فعائلة, the mīm is original, and hamza added. TABRISI (author): Though “angel” originally meant messenger, it became the established label for God's nonhuman messengers, as “heaven” came to name the familiar skies. TABRISI (أصحابنا): The author's companions say not all angels are messengers, citing 22:75; if all were messengers all would be selected, so ملك is generic rather than derived from message. TABRISI (أكثر العلماء والخليل): Most scholars derive angels from الألوكة, “message”; al-Khalil defines ألوك as message and gives the related form مألكة. TABRISI (غيره): Another etymology says a message is called ألوكة because it is chewed in the mouth, like a horse chewing its bridle. TABRISI (عدي بن زيد): Adi ibn Zayd's مألكا in his poem witnesses the message derivation. TABRISI (لبيد): Labid's ألوك in his poem witnesses the message derivation. TABRISI (الهذلي): The Hudhali poet's ألكني in his verse is another witness to the message derivation. TABRISI (author): On the message derivation, ملائكة is a reversed plural of ملأك meaning messenger; a poem attests the hamzated form. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Malāʾika derives from al-ūlūk, meaning a message; Labīd’s line about a mother sending a message is evidence. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The singular of malāʾika is malak, originally malʾak, as Sibawayh’s verse demonstrates. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو إسحاق): Abū Isḥāq glosses malʾak as ‘bearer of a message’; related forms include maʾlaka and malʾaka, with maʾālik as a plural, illustrated by a poem to al-Nuʿmān. RAZI-FULL (author): The word ملك derives from a root meaning message: ألكني إليه means send me to him, and المألكة or الألوكة means a message. RAZI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf derives الملائك as the plural of the original ملأك, like شمائل from شمأل, with feminine plural تاء. RAZI-FULL (بعض الناس): They also argue angels precede prophets because angels mediate revelation and the law to the messengers. RAZI-FULL (علي): Ali says angels serve as trustees of revelation and messengers, execute God's decrees, guard people, and keep Paradise's gates. RAZI-FULL (author): Angels are God's messengers, as stated in 35:1; the verse saying God chooses messengers from angels does not mean only some angels are messengers, since من is explanatory. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi reads من in 22:75 as explanatory rather than partitive, answering the objection that only some angels are messengers. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن مسعود وابن عباس): Ibn Masʿud, Ibn ʿAbbas, and exegetes identify Adam as the khalifa, God’s deputy in carrying out His rulings and commands and the first messenger to earth. QURTUBI-FULL (آخر): An unnamed poet uses maʾlak for a message to al-Nuʿman. QURTUBI-FULL (الشاعر): A poetic line preserves malaʾak for a messenger descending from the sky. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda derives malak from laʾaka, “to send,” and explains al-uluka and related forms as “message.” BAYDAWI-FULL (author): الملائكة is the plural of ملأك in its original form, like الشمائل from شمأل; مألك is inverted from مألكة, a message, since angels convey God’s messages to people or are messengers to them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another derivation makes the first radical hamza and the second lām from al-ʾalūka, message; māʾlak was inverted into malʾak. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A third derivation links malak to lāka, to roll something in the mouth; the messenger carries a message in the mouth, with the middle radical deleted for ease. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One analysis reconstructs the original form as faʿʾal like shamʾal, then transfers the vowel and deletes letters; malʾak is also attested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One derivation connects malak to lāka, to send: the original was malʾak, reduced by moving the vowel and deleting, with malāʾika on mufāʿala. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda gives the malʾak derivation, which Abū al-Fatḥ also selects; on this account malāʾika is mufāʿala. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Attributing the speech to the Lord fits the prior mention of provision on earth and honors the Messenger through a special address that introduces humanity's origin and destiny. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Another original-mīm derivation starts from ملأك with an extra hamza like شمأل; its vowel shifts to the lām and the hamza drops, while the plural preserves the original addition. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): A third derivation makes mīm extra and derives the word from ألك, to send. Poems with مألكة, بألوك and مألك attest the message sense; the derivation involves metathesis and hamza deletion, with the plural restoring hamza. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): A fourth analysis derives it from لأك, also meaning to send; the poem فلست لإنسي ولكن لملأك witnesses the form, and the plural restores hamza. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): A fifth derivation connects ملك to لاكه يلوكه, to turn something over, since an angel turns a message in the mouth; it derives singular ملوك and plural ملاوكة with vowel change, deletion and hamza formation. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): God answers that He knows the greater good outweighing the harms: humanity will include prophets, messengers, truthful ones, martyrs, righteous people, worshippers, scholars, the humble, and those who love and follow Him. BIQAI-FULL (أهل العربية): The grammarians derive malāʾika from the inverted form malāʾik, itself from maʾlak and the root of sending a message; on this account the mīm is extra. BIQAI-FULL (author): Biqai proposes that malāʾika gathers both senses, messenger and ordering power, as a coined word can unite meanings from two roots. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says God knew that this creation would include prophets, messengers, righteous people, and inhabitants of Paradise. BURSEVI (author): Malāʾika is the plural of malak, with tāʾ marking a feminine collective; angels are named as intermediaries and messengers between God and people, from alūka, message. ALUSI-FULL (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī, whose account the majority favor, derives malāʾika from malʾak by metathesis and connects it to al-ūlūka, meaning the message; angels are messengers to people. STUDYQURAN (author): Khalīfah can mean successor or deputy; khalīfat rasūl Allāh, successor or steward of God’s Messenger, was shortened to khalīfah and anglicized as caliph. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The name al-ūlūka is linked to a message being moved in the mouth; a horse “chews” its iron bit."}, {"id": "2:30/q06/p2", "position": "Malak is derived from dominion or strength", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن كيسان): Ibn Kaysān derives malak from malaka, treating the hamza as extra as in shamʾal from shamal, and gives the plural pattern faʿāʾila. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن كيسان): Another derivation makes the original malaʾak from malaka, with an augmentative hamza, like shamʾal from shamila. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda treats the mīm in malak as original, derives it from strength, and calls its plural malāʾika on faʿāʾila anomalous. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): One etymology makes ملك a form فعَل from الملك with original mīm; on this account only its plural فعائلة is irregular. SAMIN-DURR (النض
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
