<<chunk 6, part 3 of 0..4>>
 into,” taking khalīfa and “in the earth” as two objects; or “creating,” with one object and “in the earth” modifying khalīfa.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Jāʿil can mean “making into,” taking khalīfa and “in the earth” as two objects; or “creating,” with one object and “in the earth” modifying khalīfa."}, {"id": "2:30/q14/p21", "position": "The word jaʿil may mean create: when jaʿl takes one object it means creation, and here it is broader and more general than khalq while allowing both senses.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): The word jaʿil may mean create: when jaʿl takes one object it means creation, and here it is broader and more general than khalq while allowing both senses."}, {"id": "2:30/q14/p22", "position": "Although the appointment has not yet occurred, جاعل presents it as settled and inevitable through the active participle.", "reasons": "SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Although the appointment has not yet occurred, جاعل presents it as settled and inevitable through the active participle."}]}
{"id": "2:30/q15", "question": "What does “the earth” denote here?", "turns_on": "Whether the unqualified earth means the whole earth or Mecca in the transmitted report.", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q15/p1", "position": "The earth here is Mecca", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): A report places the earth's spreading from Mecca, the House and prophets' graves there. MAWARDI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Sābiṭ reports the Prophet said that the earth was spread out from Mecca. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The text says this is why Mecca was called Umm al-Qurā, and locates the graves of Noah, Hūd, Ṣāliḥ, and Shuʿayb between Zamzam, the Corner, and the Station. IBNATIYYA-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from the Prophet says “the earth” here means Mecca, from beneath which earth was spread; it was where prophets’ peoples were destroyed, and Noah’s, Hud’s, and Salih’s graves lie between the Station and the Corner. TABRISI (النبي): The Prophet is cited as saying that the earth was spread out from Mecca, which is why it is called the Mother of Towns. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi judges the whole-earth interpretation closer to the apparent wording than the Mecca report. QURTUBI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Sabit reports that the earth was spread from Mecca, called Umm al-Qura, and that Noah, Hud, Salih, and Shuʿayb are buried between Zamzam and the Corner and Station. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): The apparent sense of fī al-arḍ is the whole earth, as the majority hold; another view identifies the land as Mecca. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن سابط): Ibn Sābiṭ transmits the Mecca interpretation as a report traced to the Prophet; Abū Ḥayyān says it should be followed if authentic. ALUSI-FULL (الجمهور): The majority take “the earth” to mean the whole earth; another view identifies it as Mecca, based on a report attributed to the Prophet that the author considers probably unsound. TABRISI (author): A view takes الأرض as Mecca, citing its being the first land spread and a report about prophets' graves there; the author prefers the apparent, known earth. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathir grades that report mursal with a weak chain and an inserted interpretation that “earth” means Mecca; he says the apparent sense is the wider earth."}, {"id": "2:30/q15/p2", "position": "The earth means the whole earth", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The earth most naturally means all the earth from east to west."}]}
{"id": "2:30/q16", "question": "Why is the earth specified for the successor?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q16/p1", "position": "Another account says the passage gathers evidence for divine unity from earth and heaven, then follows with the beginning of creation and Adam.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Another account says the passage gathers evidence for divine unity from earth and heaven, then follows with the beginning of creation and Adam."}, {"id": "2:30/q16/p2", "position": "Another explanation says the announcement taught Adam he was created for earthly life, not Paradise; the angels sought the wisdom of that arrangement.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): Another explanation says the announcement taught Adam he was created for earthly life, not Paradise; the angels sought the wisdom of that arrangement."}, {"id": "2:30/q16/p3", "position": "The four terms form earthly and heavenly pairs, with the soul positioned between them; corruption and sanctification are the far ends, and the middle terms bridge earth and heaven.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): The four terms form earthly and heavenly pairs, with the soul positioned between them; corruption and sanctification are the far ends, and the middle terms bridge earth and heaven."}, {"id": "2:30/q16/p4", "position": "Mentioning earth signals that earth angels challenged Adam; heavenly angels administer the upper world, while earth angels envied the caliphate and their own dominion.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (author): Mentioning earth signals that earth angels challenged Adam; heavenly angels administer the upper world, while earth angels envied the caliphate and their own dominion."}, {"id": "2:30/q16/p5", "position": "Earth is specified because it is the realm of change and transformation, where the effects of all divine names sought by God become manifest, unlike the higher realm.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): Earth is specified because it is the realm of change and transformation, where the effects of all divine names sought by God become manifest, unlike the higher realm."}, {"id": "2:30/q16/p6", "position": "They reason that the successor's purpose is to glorify and sanctify God, but earthly life draws the human toward evil; they claim angels already fulfill that purpose and ask why appoint a human.", "reasons": "TABATABAI (author): They reason that the successor's purpose is to glorify and sanctify God, but earthly life draws the human toward evil; they claim angels already fulfill that purpose and ask why appoint a human."}]}
{"id": "2:30/q17", "question": "What does khalīfa mean and how is it formed?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q17/p1", "position": "Khalīfa denotes one who succeeds another", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Khalifa denotes succeeding another, with 10:14 and rulers as examples. TAB-FULL (author): Khalifa denotes succeeding another, with 10:14 and rulers as examples. TAB-FULL (author): Khalifa denotes succeeding another, with 10:14 and rulers as examples. NAHHAS (author): «خليفة» may be active: one who succeeds the angels or other predecessors in the earth, as also related. NAHHAS (author): Alternatively «خليفة» may be passive, one who is succeeded. THALABI (author): Khalifa means a replacement for those before, succeeding them after they depart. MAWARDI-FULL (author): With fatḥa, khalaf denotes righteous successors and with sukūn, wicked successors; the Qur’an and a hadith illustrate the distinction. JISHUMI (author): Khalaf with fatḥa on the lām denotes righteous successors, while sukūn denotes bad successors, as illustrated in 7:169. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Khalīfa means one who succeeds another. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Khalīfa means one who succeeds another; Ibn al-Anbārī says its original form was khalīf, with the feminine ending added to intensify praise, like ʿallāma and nasāba. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Khalifa as an active noun is a successor to angels or other earlier beings; as a passive noun, it means one made a successor. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Khalaf with a vowel refers to righteous successors, while the still form refers to wicked ones. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): خليفة is one who succeeds or represents another, with its feminine ending marking intensification. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): The majority read khalīfa with fāʾ; it can mean an active successor or one replaced, and in the active sense one entrusted to act in another's place. SAMIN-DURR (author): خليفة can mean an active successor, succeeding the people addressed or the jinn who preceded them; this is stronger because its feminine suffix is regular for the active sense. SAMIN-DURR (author): Alternatively, خليفة means one succeeded by each later generation; the feminine suffix is not regular for this passive sense unless the word has become noun-like, as in النطيحة and الذبيحة. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Khalifa here means people succeeding one another generation after generation, as in the linked verses about successors on earth. ALUSI-FULL (author): A khalīfa succeeds another and acts in their place; its feminine ending is intensive, so the term can designate a man. ELMALILI (author): God's appointing His chosen servants as successors is a form of deputation bestowed purely to honor them. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Khilāfa means succeeding another, representing that person, or exercising that person's authority. STUDYQURAN (author): In other passages khalīfah means successor, as in 7:69 for successors after Noah’s people; related references include 7:74, 10:14, 10:73, 27:62, and 35:39. NASAFI-FULL (author): Khalīfa means a successor, with a feminine hāʾ for emphasis."}, {"id": "2:30/q17/p2", "position": "The feminine ending of khalīfa intensifies or nominalizes the form", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Khalīfa is on faʿīla, which can be an intensive active form like al-ʿalīm or a passive form like al-naṭīḥa; its tāʾ can intensify. ELMALILI (author): Khalifa is an intensive nominal adjective from khalif, on the faʿīl pattern with the meaning of fāʿil; French représentant conveys the sense, with khalāʾif and khulafāʾ as plurals and khilāfa as the verbal noun."}, {"id": "2:30/q17/p3", "position": "God formed the vicegerent according to prior knowledge, composed his form, clothed him in signs of divine attributes so he might know God, and held his breaths in reserve until their manifestation.", "reasons": "SULAMI (الواسطي): God formed the vicegerent according to prior knowledge, composed his form, clothed him in signs of divine attributes so he 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
