<<chunk 10, part 1 of 0..5>>
37/p8", "position": "The third category is wāw of circumstance, which enters a nominal clause, as in the angels' “while we glorify You.”", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): The third category is wāw of circumstance, which enters a nominal clause, as in the angels' “while we glorify You.”"}, {"id": "2:30/q37/p9", "position": "It is not established that a nominal clause used as an emphatic circumstantial clause must omit its pronoun and conjunction; al-Alusi cites Sharh al-Tashil.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): It is not established that a nominal clause used as an emphatic circumstantial clause must omit its pronoun and conjunction; al-Alusi cites Sharh al-Tashil."}]}
{"id": "2:30/q38", "question": "What do the angels imply by contrasting their worship?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q38/p1", "position": "Abū ʿAlī says they asked to be placed on earth because it would benefit them.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (أبو علي): Abū ʿAlī says they asked to be placed on earth because it would benefit them."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p2", "position": "They may ask for earth, or part of it, for themselves if beneficial; God chose heaven for angels and earth for people, for their religious good.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): They may ask for earth, or part of it, for themselves if beneficial; God chose heaven for angels and earth for people, for their religious good."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p3", "position": "The wāw in ‘and we glorify’ is circumstantial, like saying, ‘Would you favor someone while I am more deserving of favor?’", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The wāw in ‘and we glorify’ is circumstantial, like saying, ‘Would you favor someone while I am more deserving of favor?’"}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p4", "position": "The angels’ question expresses their claim to greater entitlement to the caliphate and asks why humans were preferred despite their expected corruption.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (author): The angels’ question expresses their claim to greater entitlement to the caliphate and asks why humans were preferred despite their expected corruption."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p5", "position": "The angels offer themselves as God's successors, or ask Him to appoint them, questioning the benefit of an earthly successor.", "reasons": "TABATABAI (author): The angels offer themselves as God's successors, or ask Him to appoint them, questioning the benefit of an earthly successor."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p6", "position": "Angels inhabit heaven, Adam and descendants earth, including worshippers.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Angels inhabit heaven, Adam and descendants earth, including worshippers."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p7", "position": "Angels remember God, pray and magnify His command; compare thunder in 13:13.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Angels remember God, pray and magnify His command; compare thunder in 13:13."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p8", "position": "On the prayer interpretation, the angels pray and recite the Opening of the Book in their prayer.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): On the prayer interpretation, the angels pray and recite the Opening of the Book in their prayer."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p9", "position": "Without God’s grace through guidance and kindness, the angels could not worship Him.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Without God’s grace through guidance and kindness, the angels could not worship Him."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p10", "position": "The angels' praise is compared with the wording about angels praising their Lord in 42:5.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The angels' praise is compared with the wording about angels praising their Lord in 42:5."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p11", "position": "Despite abundant worship and never slipping, angels remain fearful and apprehensive of God.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Despite abundant worship and never slipping, angels remain fearful and apprehensive of God."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p12", "position": "They explain the angels’ words as saying that they pray to God.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (السدي عن ابن عباس وابن مسعود وغيرهما من الصحابة): They explain the angels’ words as saying that they pray to God."}, {"id": "2:30/q38/p13", "position": "Alternatively, the angels mean “Glory be to God and praise be to Him.”", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Alternatively, the angels mean “Glory be to God and praise be to Him.”"}]}
{"id": "2:30/q39", "question": "What does the angels' tasbīḥ mean?", "turns_on": "Whether tasbīḥ here is transcendence, spoken glorification, remembrance, or prayer.", "positions": [{"id": "2:30/q39/p1", "position": "Tasbīḥ is glorification and exaltation", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (author): Qatada glosses tasbih as glorification. TAB-FULL (بعض أهل العربية): Some Arab grammarians say the question was not a protest against God but a request to learn; the angels mentioned their own glorification because they disliked disobedience after the jinn had disobeyed. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada takes tasbih here in its familiar, literal sense of glorification. TAB-FULL (أبو ذر): Abu Dharr reports that when asked which words God loves most, the Prophet named the words God chose for the angels: repeated glorification of the Lord with praise. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari explains that the angels wondered at a creation that would sin and implied that they themselves glorified, prayed to, and obeyed God. SULAMI (الواسطي): Whoever says “I” contests divine power; the angels' boastful claim to glorify God also objected to lordship, despite being a setting for divine instruction. MAWARDI-FULL (المفضل): Al-Mufaḍḍal takes it as the familiar act of tasbīḥ, citing Jarīr’s verse about pilgrims glorifying God. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Though others may be described as pure, tasbīḥ is a religious term for the highest degree of exaltation, due only to God. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid understands it as glorifying God. QUSHAYRI (author): God drew out the angels’ concealed self-admiration in their worship, making them disclose their hidden thoughts by citing their glorification. QUSHAYRI (author): Angelic glorification has no significance without God’s favor, and human sins cause no harm when met by His pardon. QUSHAYRI (author): The angels’ glorification displays their deeds and merit, while forgiveness of human sins displays the Creator’s generosity and mercy. QUSHAYRI (author): God needs no worship; their glorification establishes their own praise, while His forgiveness establishes the Creator’s praise. QUSHAYRI (author): God knows humans’ humbled, broken hearts despite their bad deeds, whereas angels’ hearts become proud when they display glorification. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Another explanation is that the angels wondered whether the successor would be from the jinn, whose predecessors corrupted the earth, or from the angels, who glorify God; God did not reveal that Adam’s descendants would include both obedient and disobedient people. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The word's root means distancing; anyone praising God and distancing Him from evil has glorified and purified Him. WAHIDI-BASIT (بعض أهل المعاني): Some linguists explain tasbih with praise as speaking God's praise: praise and gratitude themselves honor Him and acknowledge His worthiness to be purified and exalted. JISHUMI (author): Another account says glorification benefits the angels, while their ability to perform it comes from God’s enabling. JISHUMI (author): One rejects that they asked to replace people because this implies a divine will without evidence; another rearranges the phrase to mean they glorify by God’s guidance and then praise Him. JISHUMI (قتادة): Qatāda interprets the angels’ tasbīḥ as the familiar act of glorification. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Glorifying God with praise means declaring Him free of what is unfitting to His essence and attributes. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعض المتأولين): Some read “while we glorify You” as a question about whether angels should continue in that state or change from it; Ibn Atiyya says this suits a strictly interrogative reading. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Some understand the angels to mean that if God had appointed them to succession on earth, they would glorify Him; this suits the astonishment reading. TABRISI (مجاهد): Mujahid says praising God is tasbih because praise exalts Him and recognizes He deserves glorification. RAZI-FULL (author): Angels are honored, do not disdain worship, and glorify God day and night without tiring. RAZI-FULL (علي): Ali describes angels in varied worship postures, glorifying tirelessly without sleep, lapse, bodily fatigue, or forgetfulness. RAZI-FULL (المخالف): An opponent says the angels' self-praise and claim of exclusive glorification resemble conceit and backbiting. RAZI-FULL (author): Uninterrupted glorification day and night is incompatible with committing sin. RAZI-FULL (author): One explanation is that glorifying God with praise recognizes that his praise and majesty make him deserving of glorification. RAZI-FULL (author): A second explanation is that people can glorify God only through his enabling grace, as David’s example illustrates. RAZI-FULL (author): Their self-praise may itself amount to glorifying themselves; later humans will instead humble themselves by confessing wrong and asking mercy. RAZI-FULL (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazilites argue that the angels attribute their glorification and purification to themselves; if God did those deeds, there would be no merit in them over bloodshed. QURTUBI-FULL (المفضل): Al-Mufaddal says the angels' tasbih is raising the voice in remembrance, supported by Jarir's line about pilgrims glorifying and proclaiming God's greatness. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): We purify our souls from sins for Your sake; the angels set glorification against the corruption (understood by some as idolatry) and purification against the grave vice of bloodshed. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another proposed complement contrasts the question with the angels' state: will You change us, though we glorify You? ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): In bi-ḥamdika, the bāʾ can mark acco
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
