<<chunk 10, part 2 of 0..5>>
mpaniment: the angels glorify while joined by praise, a circumstantial phrase within another circumstantial phrase. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (صفي الدين أبو عبد الله الحسين ابن الوزير أبي الحسن علي بن أبي المنصور الخزرجي): The author of Fakk al-Azrar assigns the apparent objection to Iblis and the glorification and obedience to the angels, who had first spoken in a collective answer. DURR-FULL (أبو صالح): Abu Salih glosses the angels' words as magnifying and glorifying God. ALUSI-FULL (أهل الله): Their cosmology next describes absolute darkness receiving light, the Throne appearing with the Merciful's manifest Name, and surrounding angels whose sole occupation is glorification. ALUSI-FULL (author): The first group are the exalted and proximate angels, constantly glorifying God without fatigue. ALUSI-FULL (صفي الدين الخزرجي): Al-Khazraji says the speakers differ: Iblis, included among the angels, voiced the objection, while the other angels voiced glorification after his refusal separated him from them; al-Alusi calls this an interpretive gloss, not tafsir. ALUSI-FULL (author): Putting the subject before the verbal predicate conveys restriction: the angels, in contrast to the proposed vicegerent, glorify God. ALUSI-FULL (author): If “Your praise” is construed as an objective genitive, the angels mean that they praise God because He enabled them to glorify Him. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Another class surrounds the Throne and glorifies God. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He rejects reading the angels’ glorification as a question with an omitted interrogative and an omitted alternative, since the syntax gives no evidence for either deletion."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p2", "position": "Tasbīḥ denotes prayer", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): Remembrance and prayer can be tasbih; glorification is accompanied by praise, with 40:7 and 110:3. TAB-FULL (author): In Arab usage, remembrance and prayer can be called tasbih; the report also records the angels’ repeated phrase of glorification with praise. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari reconciles prayer and glorification with purification: prayer magnifies God and cleanses him of the false attributions made by disbelievers. ZAJJAJ (author): Any act intended for God may be called tasbīḥ; completing prayer is one Arabic use of tasbīḥ. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the angels utter “Glory and praise belong to God”; this is the creatures’ prayer and glorification, through which they receive provision. THALABI (author): Another interpretation takes tasbih as prayer commanded by God; prayer is called subha. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس وابن مسعود): Ibn ʿAbbās and Ibn Masʿūd interpret the angels’ tasbīḥ as prayer. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Tasbih means declaring God free of every evil, and it can also mean prayer; to glorify God is to pray to Him. JISHUMI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās interprets the angels’ tasbīḥ as prayer. BAGHAWI-FULL (قيل): Another explanation is that the angels mean they pray in accordance with God's command; Ibn Abbas says tasbih throughout the Quran means prayer. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas and Ibn Masud say the angels’ glorification is their prayer to God. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas and Ibn Masʿud interpret ‘we glorify’ as ‘we pray,’ taking tasbih to mean prayer. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud and Ibn ʿAbbas interpret the angels' tasbih as prayer, citing the description of Jonah as one of the tasbih-makers in 37:143. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Tasbīḥ is speech, or speech with action, that magnifies and declares God free of deficiency; hence remembrance and prayer can be called tasbīḥ."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p3", "position": "Tasbīḥ declares God free of imperfection", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari glosses tasbih with praise as magnifying God through praise and gratitude; he also defines its root sense as declaring God free of attributes unworthy of him. ZAJJAJ (author): To glorify God with praise means to declare Him free of evil. ZAJJAJ (سيبويه وغيره من النحويين): Sībawayh and other grammarians gloss subḥān Allāh as declaring God free of evil and exalting Him above it. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Tasbīḥ is declaring God free of evil in a mode of exaltation; al-Aʿshā’s line uses subḥān as disavowal. WAHIDI-BASIT (الأزهري): Al-Azhari says exegetes and linguists agree that tasbih means declaring God transcendent and free of evil. RAZI-FULL (أهل التذكير): Ahl al-tadhkir say tasbih in the Qur’an can mean transcendence: God has no peer, administers the heavens and worlds, is above wrong descriptions, self-sufficient and sovereign, all-knowing, and without consort or child. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The angels' tasbih means declaring God exalted above what does not suit His attributes; in Arabic it is magnifying Him by declaring Him free of evil, as al-Aʿsha's line uses subhan for disavowal. SAMIN-DURR (author): تسبيح means declaring transcendence and disavowal; its root سبْح denotes distance, as in swimming. SAMIN-DURR (author): سبحان الله declares God transcendent and free of what does not befit Him; the poem uses سبحان من علقمة for تنزيها."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p4", "position": "Al-Tabari says tasbih fundamentally declares God free of attributes that do not belong to him; al-Asha’s verse means, reproachfully, ‘Glory be to God against alqama’s boasting.’", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari says tasbih fundamentally declares God free of attributes that do not belong to him; al-Asha’s verse means, reproachfully, ‘Glory be to God against alqama’s boasting.’"}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p5", "position": "Al-Aʿshā’s line uses the word سبحان to mean disavowal of ʿAlqama and his boasting.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): Al-Aʿshā’s line uses the word سبحان to mean disavowal of ʿAlqama and his boasting."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p6", "position": "Al-Hasan explains the angels' phrase as saying, Subhan Allah wa bihamdihi.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن): Al-Hasan explains the angels' phrase as saying, Subhan Allah wa bihamdihi."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p7", "position": "Subhan Allah means God's freedom from evil and became an exclamation of wonder; al-A'sha's verse uses it to express astonishment.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Subhan Allah means God's freedom from evil and became an exclamation of wonder; al-A'sha's verse uses it to express astonishment."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p8", "position": "Tasbīḥ and taqdīs mean declaring God far removed from evil; their roots also convey going far away.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Tasbīḥ and taqdīs mean declaring God far removed from evil; their roots also convey going far away."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p9", "position": "Qatada takes tasbih in its ordinary linguistic sense: saying “subhan Allah.”", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (قتادة): Qatada takes tasbih in its ordinary linguistic sense: saying “subhan Allah.”"}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p10", "position": "Muqātil interprets their tasbīḥ as saying ‘subḥāna Allāh.’", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مقتادة): Muqātil interprets their tasbīḥ as saying ‘subḥāna Allāh.’"}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p11", "position": "Al-Rāzī says the preposition bi in the angels' tasbīḥ requires grammatical analysis to determine what it attaches to.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Rāzī says the preposition bi in the angels' tasbīḥ requires grammatical analysis to determine what it attaches to."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p12", "position": "God needs no creatures’ tasbih;", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): God needs no creatures’ tasbih; because nonliving things do not need its reward, God gives their reward to the human who serves him, showing that the whole world can be put at the servant’s service."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p13", "position": "They urge tasbih for divine favor and relief, including seeking God’s pleasure and praising him morning and evening.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أهل التذكير): They urge tasbih for divine favor and relief, including seeking God’s pleasure and praising him morning and evening."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p14", "position": "Tasbih and taqdis mean distancing God from what is evil or unfitting.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Tasbih and taqdis mean distancing God from what is evil or unfitting."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p15", "position": "Distance from evil is tasbih; distance from good is a curse (laʿn).", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Distance from evil is tasbih; distance from good is a curse (laʿn)."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p16", "position": "Ahl al-tadhkir also take tasbih as expressing wonder: at subduing powerful animals for humans, creating without fatigue, teaching without a human teacher, and forgiving long sin after brief repentance.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (أهل التذكير): Ahl al-tadhkir also take tasbih as expressing wonder: at subduing powerful animals for humans, creating without fatigue, teaching without a human teacher, and forgiving long sin after brief repentance."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p17", "position": "Talha b. ʿUbayd Allah asked the Prophet what subhan Allah means; the Prophet explained it as declaring God free of every evil.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (طلحة بن عبيد الله): Talha b. ʿUbayd Allah asked the Prophet what subhan Allah means; the Prophet explained it as declaring God free of every evil."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p18", "position": "Both tasbīḥ and taqdīs declare God far removed from imperfection; the terms evoke traveling far through land or water. Taqdīs also means purification, since cleansing removes impurity.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Both tasbīḥ and taqdīs declare God far removed from imperfection; the terms evoke traveling far through land or water. Taqdīs also means purification, since cleansing removes impurity."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p19", "position": "An alternative makes the bāʾ causal and attaches it to تسبيح; Ibn ʿAṭiyya treats the phrase as an interpolated acknowledgment of God's guidance.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): An alternative makes the bāʾ causal and attaches it to تسبيح; Ibn ʿAṭiyya treats the phrase as an interpolated acknowledgment of God's guidance."}, {"id": "2:30/q39/p20", "position": 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
