<<chunk 16, part 4 of 0..5>>
n": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q08/p1", "position": "Food or nourishment, including what is eaten or drunk", "reasons": "NAHHAS: يا موسى is a singular vocative; لن makes نصبر subjunctive, على makes طعام genitive, and واحد is its adjective. JISHUMI: Ṭaʿām means food or nourishment; ṭaʿm with ḍamma means eating, ṭaʿm also means taste, and food can denote nourishing substance. TABRISI: Ṭabrisī defines food as nourishment, ṭaʿm as eating, and food also as a physical substance perceived by taste. QURTUBI-FULL: An unnamed poet describes ostriches at Wajrah as tasting sleep only while fasting, illustrating the idiom. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو خراش): Abū Khirāsh's poetry uses ṭaʿm first for food and then for its savor or desirability. QURTUBI-FULL: Ṭaʿām can mean anything eaten or drunk; Qur'anic 'taste' can include drinking wine, and honey as salwā would also be a drink. QURTUBI-FULL: Food can conventionally mean grain or dates specifically; Abū Saʿīd's report on zakāt al-fiṭr contrasts a measure of food with barley. QURTUBI-FULL: With fatḥah, ṭaʿm can mean what taste conveys or something desirable; with ḍammah it means food. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Ṭaʿām means whatever is eaten, analogously to ʿaṭāʾ for whatever is given, and is a generic noun. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): One explanation follows the singular grammatical form of ṭaʿām, not the fact that it refers to two foods. SAMIN-DURR: لن نصبر على طعام واحد is a subject–predicate clause, and the whole clause is an object of the verb of saying. SAMIN-DURR: The phrase ما يطعم النوم means does not sleep; a poem uses it for ostriches that sleep only standing. SAMIN-DURR: طعام can mean anything eaten or drunk, as in 2:249, but sometimes refers specifically to certain foods such as grain or dates; a charity hadith distinguishes a measure of food from barley. SAMIN-DURR: طعم can also mean giving; the prophetic report إذا استطعمكم الإمام فأطعموه means prompt the imam when he asks for a cue."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q09", "question": "How is فَٱدْعُ pronounced and parsed?", "turns_on": "The usual imperative vowel versus the Banū ʿĀmir dialect and its grammatical explanation.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q09/p1", "position": "Kasra in the Banū ʿĀmir form", "reasons": "NAHHAS: فادع is a request functioning like an imperative, so its wāw is dropped; Banū ʿĀmir pronounce its ʿayn with kasra at the consonant junction. IBNATIYYA-FULL: In the dialect of Banu Amir, the ʿayn of فادع is pronounced with kasra. QURTUBI-FULL: Banū ʿĀmir pronounce fa-dʿu with kasrah on ʿayn at the consonant meeting, treating the defective verb like a sound verb. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بنو عامر): The Banū ʿĀmir dialect pronounces the command fa-dʿi with kasra on the ʿayn, treating daʿā as a weak verb like ramā-yarmī."}, {"id": "2:61/q09/p2", "position": "The imperative has a dialectal form", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: He prefers construing the following verb as the response to an imperative, as with “tell My servants to establish prayer”; Qur’anic imperatives without a jussive particle are otherwise indicative. SAMIN-DURR: The dialect may instead reflect a verb pattern دعى يدعي like رمى يرمي. SAMIN-DURR: لنا attaches to ادع, and its lām expresses purpose."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q10", "question": "What are they asking Moses to do?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q10/p1", "position": "They ask Moses to petition God for them", "reasons": "THALABI: Fa-dʿu means “ask,” and lanā means “for us.” WAHIDI-BASIT (قتادة): Qatada says they remembered their former Egyptian food and asked Moses to pray for it; ta'am is a generic term for what is eaten. WAHIDI-BASIT (أصحاب المعاني): Some linguists say food was called one because their daily nourishment never changed, like someone described as following one regular course by keeping to fasting and prayer. WAHIDI-BASIT: The petition is expressed in the past tense as an optimistic expression that it has already happened. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Ask for us” means ask God on our behalf. BAYDAWI-FULL: They ask Moses to petition his Lord on their behalf. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The Israelites were weary of the wilderness and repetitive food, distant from their familiar land and habits; they expressed impatience and asked Moses to petition God for them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The second ذلك may repeat the earlier reference to punishment, or point to disbelief and killing; on the latter reading it is neither repetition nor emphasis. BURSEVI: The request asks Moses to supplicate for them; the connective “so” makes their inability to endure the diet the cause of the request. ALUSI-FULL: The phrase asks Moses to pray on their behalf for the listed produce; the conjunction marks their impatience as the reason for asking. ALUSI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet asked ʿUmar to include him among those for whom he prayed. ALUSI-FULL (الأثر): A transmitted saying urges prayer through tongues that have not disobeyed God, understood here as other people's tongues. IBNASHUR-FULL: On either reading, both باءs are causal; Ibn ʿĀshūr rejects making one mean مع, since repetition can replace conjunction without the strained reading in al-Kashshāf and al-Ṭībī."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q11", "question": "What does the supplication word mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q11/p1", "position": "Supplication is a humble request to one above", "reasons": "THALABI (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda says the phrase means they bore and acknowledged it, comparing it to the prophetic supplication “I acknowledge Your favor upon me and my sin”; God’s anger means blame, threat, and punishment, and likewise hatred and wrath. WAHIDI-BASIT: Dua means asking one who can grant benefit or harm; it is named for the call used by a petitioner. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن السراج): Ibn al-Sarraj says dua originally means calling; a request is called dua because the petitioner says Lord and calls upon God. TABRISI (ابن السراج): Ibn al-Sarraj derives duʿāʾ, supplication, from nidāʾ, calling. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Duʿāʾ is calling aloud by the name of the person invoked, from daʿā/yadʿū. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: A Prophetic supplication uses باء for both a blessing and a sin, confirming the two usages. SAMIN-DURR: دعاء here means asking, but can also mean naming or calling, as in the quoted poem دعتني أخاها. BURSEVI: Bursevī cites al-Baghawī’s note that Arabic can use a dual form for one thing, as in the phrase about pearls and coral, which come only from salt water. ALUSI-FULL: The proposal that a singular “one” stands for two foods is still less plausible; the cited comparison uses a dual expression for pearls that come from only one sea. ALUSI-FULL: Calling God “Lord” prepares the grounds for the prayer's acceptance."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q12", "question": "Why did they say 'your Lord'?", "turns_on": "Moses' special standing versus a perceived lack of reverence in the Israelites' wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q12/p1", "position": "Their wording shows distance or irreverence", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: They attribute the title Lord to Moses rather than themselves despite God's repeated manifestation to them as benefactor. ELMALILI: They should preserve proper reverence rather than say “your Lord” where “our Lord” is due, which displays faithlessness."}, {"id": "2:61/q12/p2", "position": "They invoke Moses' relationship with God", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Fa-dʿu lanā rabbaka means ask your Lord for us; the object of the prayer is omitted and understood as asking Him to produce the requested foods."}, {"id": "2:61/q12/p3", "position": "Moses' special closeness to God", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: They asked Moses to pray because prophetic prayers are more likely to be answered; more generally, one person's prayer for another is especially apt to be answered."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q13", "question": "How does يُخْرِجْ depend on the preceding request?", "turns_on": "Imperative response, an implied command, supplication, or omitted command lām.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q13/p1", "position": "The verb is jussive in the petition", "reasons": "AKHFASH: The added من is not confined to negation and questions: it appears in the cited verse and in ordinary expressions such as “Zayd is among the best.” AKHFASH: Common idioms omit an understood noun: “Do you want …?” means “Do you have a need for …?”, and “no harm on you” is similarly elliptical. KASHSHAF-FULL: The verb 'bring forth' means to make appear and produce. TABRISI: Another parse makes yukh’rij jussive after an implicit command lām, as in the cited verse from Ibrahim 14:31. TABRISI (الفراء): Al-Farra states that deleting the command lām is allowed only in poetry, where meter forces it. TABRISI (أبو زيد): Abu Zayd cites poetry with yaqūm jussive without the command lām as evidence for its omission. TABRISI: Another poetic example has adʿu coordinated with udʿu after omission of the command lām. TABRISI: A further poetic example makes tafdi jussive with the implied sense li-tafdi. RAZI-FULL: The recognized reading has yukh'rij with yaḍamma and ra kasra, and tanbut with taḍamma and ta kasra. RAZI-FULL (زيد بن علي): Zayd b. ʿAlī reads yukh'rij with ya fatḥa and ra ḍamma, and tanbut with ta fatḥa and ba ḍamma. NASAFI-FULL: They ask Moses to ask God to bring forth food; the verbs mean to ask and to manifest or produce. SAMIN-DURR: When a damma before و creates a long vowel, that length blocks assimilation between identical following sounds, so the letters remain distinct, as in آمنوا وعملوا and الذي يوسوس. SAMIN-DURR: The standard imperative is ادع with ḍamma; Banu Amir use ادع with kasra. SAMIN-DURR: The preposition من may attach to the verb and mark the point of origin. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): An alternative attaches من الله directly to the verb, understanding رجعوا من الله بغضب; the author considers this weak. SAMIN-DURR: من الله most naturally modifies غضب as an adjective, with an implied كائن; من marks metaphorical origin. ALUSI-FULL (بنو عامر): Banu ʿAmir read the imperative with kasra on its final letter, treating دعا like the defective verb رمى."}, {"id
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
