<<chunk 16, part 5 of 0..5>>
": "2:61/q13/p2", "position": "Jussive response to imperative", "reasons": "NAHHAS: يخرج لنا is jussive as the response to a command with conditional force. WAHIDI-BASIT: Yukhrij means asking God to bring something out; the following imperfect serves as the response to the preceding command, as in two cited verses. IBNATIYYA-FULL: يخرج is jussive through the conditional sense implicit in the command; Abu Umar al-Jarmi instead makes the command itself govern it. BAYDAWI-FULL: Yukhrij means to bring forth or make exist; its jussive form answers the petition because prayer causes the response. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Yukh r ij is jussive as the response to the command udʿu, parallel to the response in the verse about fulfilling God’s covenant. SAMIN-DURR: يخرج is jussive as the response to the imperative."}, {"id": "2:61/q13/p3", "position": "Jussive after implied command", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (بعض النحويين): Some grammarians supply an implied request: ask God and say, “Bring it out for us,” and then He brings it out for them. QURTUBI-FULL: Yukh'rij is jussive as though the command says, 'Ask Him and say: bring forth'; al-Zajjāj weakens the alternative that supplies a deleted lām."}, {"id": "2:61/q13/p4", "position": "Jussive after omitted command lām", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Yukh'rij is jussive as though the command says, 'Ask Him and say: bring forth'; al-Zajjāj weakens the alternative that supplies a deleted lām. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعضهم): Some say yukh r ij is jussive under an unexpressed lām of command; Basran grammarians do not allow this analysis."}, {"id": "2:61/q13/p5", "position": "The verb itself is supplication", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (قوم): Others treat “yukhriǧ lanā” as a supplication, equivalent to the direct request “Bring it out for us.”"}]}
{"id": "2:61/q14", "question": "What is the object of 'bring forth,' and how is mā parsed?", "turns_on": "Whether an edible object is omitted or mā itself functions as the object or verbal noun.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q14/p1", "position": "An omitted concrete object", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: The object of yukhrij is omitted and understood as something from the earth's plants; the same kind of omitted object occurs in the verse about Abraham's descendants. TABRISI: Yukh’rij is jussive as the answer to an omitted command, understood as asking God and telling Him to bring forth the requested food; the implied conditional is indicated by context. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another grammatical analysis supplies an omitted command, ask Him to bring the foods forth, with yukh r ij responding to that command. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash takes the preposition as causal and attached to باء, with an omitted object: they deserved punishment because God was angry with them. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Some grammarians posit an omitted command lām, understanding ليخرج; al-Zajjaj weakens that analysis. SAMIN-DURR (سيبويه): Sibawayh supplies an omitted object for يخرج: مأكولا or شيئا from what the earth grows. SAMIN-DURR: ما may be a relative noun or an indefinite noun with an adjective, with its resumptive omitted; it cannot be a verbal noun because the object produced is a concrete substance, not cultivation as an action, under either analysis. BURHAN: In “ask your Lord to bring forth for us,” the omitted object is “something.” BURSEVI: In “bring forth for us,” the object is omitted, and the verb is jussive as the response to the command to supplicate. ALUSI-FULL: The verb يخرج is jussive as the response to the imperative; Basran grammarians do not allow explaining its jussive with an omitted لام الطلب. ALUSI-FULL: ما is a relative pronoun with its object omitted; Abu al-Baqa rejects taking it as a verbal noun because the implied referent would be a substance."}, {"id": "2:61/q14/p2", "position": "Mā itself serves as object", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس): Al-Naḥḥās says al-Akhfash sought an object for yukh'rij by treating mā as that object. SAMIN-DURR: ما may be a relative noun or an indefinite noun with an adjective, with its resumptive omitted; it cannot be a verbal noun because the object produced is a concrete substance, not cultivation as an action, under either analysis. ALUSI-FULL: ما is a relative pronoun with its object omitted; Abu al-Baqa rejects taking it as a verbal noun because the implied referent would be a substance."}, {"id": "2:61/q14/p3", "position": "Mā is a verbal noun", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعضهم): Some take mā as a verbal noun, meaning from the earth’s growing. SAMIN-DURR: ما may be a relative noun or an indefinite noun with an adjective, with its resumptive omitted; it cannot be a verbal noun because the object produced is a concrete substance, not cultivation as an action, under either analysis. ALUSI-FULL: ما is a relative pronoun with its object omitted; Abu al-Baqa rejects taking it as a verbal noun because the implied referent would be a substance."}, {"id": "2:61/q14/p4", "position": "The object is inferred from the crop list", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: An objection says God gave them an immediate worldly request after they rejected what He chose, as in 42:20; Razi answers that this departs from the apparent meaning. RAZI-FULL: Razi answers the Muʿtazilite objection by counterarguing with knowledge and motive; he says the nature of disbelief was discussed earlier. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa explains the kasra as resolving two adjacent sukuns while treating the weak verb like a sound verb; the author objects that normally the first, not second, of two sukuns is vowelled."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q15", "question": "What does the first min in mimmā do?", "turns_on": "Partitive or extra min in an affirmative clause, with or without an omitted object.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q15/p1", "position": "Partitive min", "reasons": "AKHFASH: The first من is partitive: the earth produces some unspecified amount of its plants, with the word “something” left unexpressed. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari reads min as partitive: the Israelites asked for some of what the earth produces, so the particle itself supplies the partitive sense. TABRISI: Min in mimmā is partitive because they sought some of what the earth produces, not everything; the alternative treats it as redundant, but min is added only in negation. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Min is a genitive preposition used for partitive meaning, beginning point, and explanation of a kind; context also licenses figurative uses. QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurṭubī prefers an omitted object inferred as edible food; the first min is partitive and the second specifies. BAYDAWI-FULL: The phrase about what the earth grows uses figurative attribution, putting the recipient in the agent's place, and min is partitive. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (سيبويه): Sībawayh takes min in مما تنبت الأرض as partitive, with an omitted object of yukh r ij meaning something edible from what the earth grows. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Both occurrences of من are partitive and attach to يخرج, either directly or through an estimated repeated verb; the latter analysis is standard. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He prefers taking both particles as partitive; his school rejects the explanatory sense of من here and reinterprets its evidence. SAMIN-DURR: Alternatively, من may qualify the omitted object as something from what the earth grows, with من partitive. BURSEVI: The wording figuratively assigns growth to the receptive earth in place of God, the true agent; “min” is partitive and “mā” is relative. ALUSI-FULL: The first من is partitive: they ask for some of what the earth grows, specifically some edible produce."}, {"id": "2:61/q15/p2", "position": "Extra min", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (بعضهم): An alternative grammatical view takes min as redundant, yielding the sense of what the earth grows; its proponents cite Arabic usage and Qur'an 2:271. Against — NAHHAS (الأخفش): Akhfash calls من extra so ما can serve as the object of يخرج; Nahhas rejects this under Sibawayh's rule that من is not extra in affirmative clauses, supplying an omitted object: edible produce. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash regards من in مما as extra and ما as the object; Sibawayh rejects extra من outside negation, as in ما رأيت من أحد. TABRISI: Min in mimmā is partitive because they sought some of what the earth produces, not everything; the alternative treats it as redundant, but min is added only in negation. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash regards min in mimmā as extra, while Sībawayh treats it as non-extra because the clause is affirmative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash takes min as redundant and mā as a relative pronoun with an omitted object pronoun, a deletion that meets the required conditions. SAMIN-DURR (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash treats من as an extra marker in the object, yielding يخرج ما تنبته الأرض; he does not require a special condition for its being extra. ALUSI-FULL: Here “bring forth” is a figurative consequence of literal extraction: it means producing by creation, not merely revealing what was hidden. Against — ALUSI-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash treats the first من as extra, a parsing the author rejects."}, {"id": "2:61/q15/p3", "position": "The first min has a disputed role", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Sibawayh supplies an omitted object for يخرج, estimated as مأكولا مما تنبت الأرض."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
