<<chunk 16, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:61/q02", "question": "What provisions surrounded the wilderness episode?", "turns_on": "Different reports identify salwā as bird or honey and describe other wilderness gifts.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q02/p1", "position": "Manna was a sweet substance like honey", "reasons": "IBNHISHAM (ابن هشام): Manna was a sweet substance falling on the Israelites’ trees at dawn; they gathered and ate or drank it like honey. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari explains maghāfīr as a sweet substance resembling honey that descends from the sky and settles on trees."}, {"id": "2:61/q02/p2", "position": "Garments and a guiding light were supplied", "reasons": "MUQATIL: When asked about clothing, God made the Israelites' garments grow with their children, remain on adults, and neither tear, wear out, nor become dirty; a pillar of light illuminated their journeys at night without moonlight."}, {"id": "2:61/q02/p3", "position": "Manna and salwā were satisfying foods", "reasons": "IBNHISHAM (أعشى بني قيس بن ثعلبة): Al-Aʿshā invokes manna and salwā as satisfying provisions, supporting their place as foods in the Israelites’ account."}, {"id": "2:61/q02/p4", "position": "Salwā was a bird, perhaps quail", "reasons": "IBNHISHAM (ابن هشام): Salwā is described as a bird, with singular salwāt; one reported identification is the quail."}, {"id": "2:61/q02/p5", "position": "Salwā could mean honey", "reasons": "IBNHISHAM (خالد بن زهير الهذلي): Ibn Hishām also reports that salwā can mean honey, citing a line by Khālid ibn Zuhayr al-Hudhalī."}, {"id": "2:61/q02/p6", "position": "Clouds gave shade", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says a cloud shaded the Israelites in the wilderness when they received manna and quail."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q03", "question": "Why did the Israelites ask for other food?", "turns_on": "Former habits, monotony, desire for settlement, social dependence, or appetite and ingratitude.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q03/p1", "position": "They wanted other produce", "reasons": "AKHFASH: Alternatively, من can be treated as extra, as in “I saw no one” or “did a man come to you?” TAB-FULL: Kufr is covering or concealing; God’s signs are His proofs, evidences, and indications of His oneness and His messengers’ truthfulness. TAB-FULL: The charge means they denied God’s proofs of His oneness and the messengers’ truth, rejected their force, and called them lies. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفرزدق): His line to Muʿāwiya uses بؤت to mean ‘I would have acknowledged it,’ as if taking the place of one who confesses it. JISHUMI: Wāḥid can mean one, the first number, or what cannot be divided; God is one through uniqueness in His praiseworthy attributes. KASHSHAF-FULL: The requested greens are choice vegetables eaten by people, such as mint, celery and leek. TABRISI (الفرزدق): Al-Farazdaq's image of a spider's web spread over someone illustrates the idiom of something being laid upon them. TABRISI: Anger means the will to inflict harm; when attributed to God it means His will to punish the one under wrath. TABRISI: Wāḥid is the first number; God is one because He is distinguished by His most beautiful attributes. RAZI-FULL: Abu Muslim's side answers that ownership normally entails unrestricted use, and barring entry contradicts that default without evidence. QURTUBI-FULL: Asking someone to feed one a report means asking them to tell it; an imam's being asked to be fed means prompting him when he loses his recitation. QURTUBI-FULL: Second, God's gift came with a command to eat it, so continuing in obedience and gratitude brought afterlife reward, unlike their request. NASAFI-FULL: The requested greens are the earth's vegetables, especially choice herbs such as mint, celery and leek. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Wāḥid means indivisible or something to which no second is added; waḥada/yahidu means to be alone. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The pronoun could instead refer to God, supported by the ensuing command and promise. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبي): Ubayy reads أتبدلون; the wording is figurative because God alone effects the change, but their request makes them seem to change it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: A commentator mistakenly split Zuhayr al-Kisa'i into two people when attributing the anomalous reading; Zuhayr al-Kisa'i and al-Farqabi are one man. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The verb باء is used with good outcomes as well as evil ones, contrary to the claim that it occurs only for evil. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The definite wording can instead emphasize totality: no right existed, whether recognized by Muslims or anyone else. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الخليل بن أحمد): Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad subsisted on barley flour and fresh water, yet had an exceptionally bright mind and strong body, campaigning one year and making pilgrimage the next. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa regards the indefinite-relative analysis as weak because the request refers to a specific thing, not an unspecified one. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says cities rarely exhibit extraordinary breaks in ordinary order; ascetics therefore seek travel and withdrawal from inhabited places to experience provision by God's word without the burden of His established order. BURSEVI: The clause beginning “He said” is a new sentence answering an implied question about what God or Moses replied. ALUSI-FULL: Calling the requested items simply ما avoids naming them directly as a sign of disdain. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): One reply distinguishes the prophets who were killed from the messengers promised help. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas is reported to say that God decreed that seventy thousand people would be killed for each prophet and thirty-five thousand for each caliph; the author finds this answer unsound. IBNASHUR-FULL: The بدل family means putting one thing or quality in place of another, or compensating one thing with another. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو الطيب): Abū al-Ṭayyib’s couplet offers a parallel reproach: if this year pleases you, return to Homs next year."}, {"id": "2:61/q03/p2", "position": "Weariness and desire for variety", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says they tired of their food and recalled the way of life they had before, which prompted their request for produce. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatada says they tired of their food and recalled the life they had before. WAHIDI-BASIT (سعيد بن المسيب): Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib says the people had grown tired of their way of life. BAGHAWI-FULL: The Israelites grew weary of eating manna and quail. KASHSHAF-FULL: The people had been farmers; returning to their old habits made them weary of their blessing and desirous of misery. TABRISI (قتادة): Qatada says the people were shaded by clouds and given manna and quails in the wilderness, tired of them, recalled life in Egypt, and asked Moses for its produce. QURTUBI-FULL: The request occurred during the wandering, after they tired of manna and quail and remembered their former life in Egypt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: They may have sought other foods to leave the wilderness, where those foods were unavailable; variety also improves appetite and digestion compared with a single repeated food. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says they had tired of their wilderness food and recalled the life they had before, prompting their request to Moses. BURSEVI: In the wilderness they tired of unchanging manna and quail, remembered their former agricultural life in Egypt, and longed for familiar habits."}, {"id": "2:61/q03/p3", "position": "Longing for former food and habits", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says they tired of their food and recalled the way of life they had before, which prompted their request for produce. TAB-FULL (قتادة): In another report, Qatada says that after reaching Syria they lacked their former foods and asked Moses for crops. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatada says they tired of their food and recalled the life they had before. THALABI (الحسن): The Israelites were people accustomed to leeks, onions, and lentils; they reverted to their bad former habits and craved familiar foods, so they rejected manna and quails. KASHSHAF-FULL: The people had been farmers; returning to their old habits made them weary of their blessing and desirous of misery. TABRISI (قتادة): Qatada says the people were shaded by clouds and given manna and quails in the wilderness, tired of them, recalled life in Egypt, and asked Moses for its produce. QURTUBI-FULL: The request occurred during the wandering, after they tired of manna and quail and remembered their former life in Egypt. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says they had tired of their wilderness food and recalled the life they had before, prompting their request to Moses. BURSEVI: In the wilderness they tired of unchanging manna and quail, remembered their former agricultural life in Egypt, and longed for familiar habits. ELMALILI: While making a request, they should remember past deprivation and seek increase through gratitude and an elevated spirit."}, {"id": "2:61/q03/p4", "position": "Desire for settled life", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (السدي): Al-Suddi says that after leaving the wilderness, the manna and quails were withdrawn and the Israelites ate vegetables. KASHSHAF-FULL: The wilderness extended from Jerusalem to Qinnasrin, twelve farsakhs by eight. TABRISI (قتادة): Qatada says the people were shaded by clouds and given manna and quails in the wilderness, tired of them, recalled life in Egypt, and asked Moses for its produce. NASAFI-FULL: The things they requested are available in cities, not in the wilderness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: They may have sought other foods to leave the wilderness, where those foods were unavailable; variety also improves appetite and digestion compared with a single repeated food. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Moses' point is that the requested produce is common in any city, so it is too lowly and plentiful to warrant asking God for it. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines asking as seeking what need calls for and what suffices, and says the requested goods are found in cities where God has established worldly wisdom, not in the wildernes
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
