<<chunk 16, part 1 of 0..5>>
s. BIQAI-FULL: Israel denied the great gifts of manna, quail, and water by growing dissatisfied and requesting other food; their wilderness wandering was near at hand. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says they had tired of their wilderness food and recalled the life they had before, prompting their request to Moses. BURSEVI: In the wilderness they tired of unchanging manna and quail, remembered their former agricultural life in Egypt, and longed for familiar habits."}, {"id": "2:61/q03/p5", "position": "Desire for social differences", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation is that they could not bear universal prosperity, which left no one needing help; the passage says they were the first to use slaves and servants."}, {"id": "2:61/q03/p6", "position": "Appetite and ingratitude", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: طعم with fatḥa can mean the verbal noun, something desired as food, or what taste perceives, as in sweet and bitter taste."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q04", "question": "What does their claim that they cannot endure mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q04/p1", "position": "Restraint or endurance of the self", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the command means a town; he takes it to be the holy land God assigned to Israel, citing 5:21. JISHUMI: Ṣabr is restraint of the self from what it desires, opposite to panic; the cited poem contrasts patience with panic. JISHUMI (الحسن وأبو العالية والربيع والأعمش): Another view identifies the destination as Pharaoh’s Egypt; another identifies it as Jerusalem, where they could obtain the plants they wanted. JISHUMI (قيل): Another explanation says they had grown tired of the wilderness and were too ashamed to state that plainly, so they hinted at it indirectly. BAGHAWI-FULL: The familiar reading omits the hamza; one explanation is that it was dropped for ease because the word is used frequently. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash permits inflecting the name because of its lightness and resemblance to Hind and Daʿd; Sibawayh does not permit this. IBNATIYYA-FULL (غير الأخفش): Another explanation says the word is inflected because it denotes a place. TABRISI: Another explanation says they sought produce so the poor could assist the rich, rather than having everyone equally rich and independent. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Baqalat and abqalat are both eloquent forms for land sprouting vegetation; ibtaqalat describes camels grazing. RAZI-FULL: Their request may have been driven by weariness with the wilderness and a desire to reach settled lands, rather than by the foods themselves. RAZI-FULL: An objection says the command to enter the Holy Land may be recommendatory and therefore need not bar entry into Egypt; Razi invokes the principle that an imperative is presumptively obligatory. RAZI-FULL: Even if entering the Holy Land were only recommended, allowing the prophets to abandon a recommended duty would be improper. RAZI-FULL: A reply says do not turn back can mean do not disobey the command or deny the Holy Land's superiority, or the prohibition may apply only for a specified time; Razi finds that limitation contrary to the apparent sense. RAZI-FULL: Razi says the context makes do not turn back refer to the immediately preceding order to enter the Holy Land, while restricting the prohibition to a particular time departs from its apparent meaning. RAZI-FULL: An objection says owning a house does not always permit entry, as when a person observing mosque retreat owns a home; perhaps Israel's inheritance meant authority while the Holy Land command barred entry. QURTUBI-FULL (عكرمة عن ابن عباس): ʿIkrimah transmits Ibn ʿAbbās's explanation: a town among these towns. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): The tanwin may still indicate an unspecified city, specifically one among the cities of the Holy Land, as supported by the command to enter the Holy Land. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another explanation treats the phrase as emphatic because no prophet ever brought anything warranting death; those killed were hated, and their killing raised their rank. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: One explanation takes definite الحق as an allusion to the established rule in the Prophetic hadith that Muslim blood is protected except in three cases. SAMIN-DURR: On the near-in-this-world interpretation, the superior food's benefit is obtained in the afterlife through patience. SAMIN-DURR: Alternatively it may be an accusative circumstantial phrase describing the omitted pronoun returning to ما; من remains explanatory. SAMIN-DURR: The Prophet's ban on saying راعنا is analogous: the Jews could exploit that word as an insult in their language; alternatively, it encouraged choosing the most eloquent language. BIQAI-FULL: لن نصبر means they would not endure the food for long. BURSEVI (قيل): An alternative explanation is that they could not bear everyone being self-sufficient, since mutual aid would disappear; they were also early adopters of servants and slaves. BURSEVI: This community would not have spoken like Israel because of its brighter lights and penetrating spiritual insight; it is the balanced community of 2:143. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Another explanation confines the prohibition to early Islam, when Jewish subterfuge was prevalent, as with replacing راعنا by انظرنا. IBNASHUR-FULL: The episode shifts from favors to Israel's poor choice of appetite, which may still be lawful, but their words show discourtesy toward Moses and the benefactor: ‘we cannot endure’ casts the given food as hateful."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q05", "question": "Was their request sinful?", "turns_on": "Whether the request rejects God's choice, and whether rebuke or a grant establishes sin.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q05/p1", "position": "Sinful ingratitude", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Al-Hasan says they were ungrateful, recalled their former life, and requested the vegetables and foods they used to eat. WAHIDI-BASIT: They called it one food because manna with quail was eaten together like one dish and presented as one color, although made from different ingredients. JISHUMI: Some say the request was not sinful because both foods were permitted; others say it was sinful because they resented God’s choice, which the author regards as stronger. TABRISI: The more apt view is that the request was sinful because they were reproached for refusing what God chose. RAZI-FULL (الظاهريون من المفسرين): Most literalist commentators hold that the request for another kind of food was sinful, but Razi rejects this view. Against — RAZI-FULL: Razi argues that manna and quail had been permitted rather than commanded, so asking for another food was permissible, including asking through Moses because that seemed likelier to be answered. Against — RAZI-FULL: Razi says the rhetorical rebuke may concern losing a greater worldly benefit or a greater afterlife benefit, rather than sin in the request itself. RAZI-FULL: An objection reads their inability to endure one food as proof they disliked the manna and quail, making the request sinful. Against — RAZI-FULL: Razi replies that they expressed desire for another food, not dissatisfaction with what they had; the future negation in lan does not establish resentment toward the present food. RAZI-FULL: A counterargument says guaranteed food disliked by their tastes was harder to consume than desired food obtained with effort; Razi answers that certain present benefit still outweighs uncertain distant benefit. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abū Ḥayyān replies that saying they could not endure one food shows a desire for other foods, not necessarily dissatisfaction with what God provided; a rebuke may concern forfeiting worldly or afterlife benefit. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation says they meant they could not endure everyone being wealthy and no one needing to serve another; the one food represents their common status in the wilderness before social differences returned. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Because replacing one food kind with another is a reasonable aim and the Qurʾān does not say they were forbidden to ask, the request cannot be treated as sinful. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الحسن البصري): Al-Hasan says they showed ingratitude, would not endure the provision, and recalled the diet they had lived on before. ALUSI-FULL: The author endorses al-Salikuti's judgment that al-Razi's inference is weak: granting the request does not make their ungrateful demand virtuous. ALUSI-FULL: Although inability to endure one food might imply wanting an addition, their aversion and ingratitude imply a wish to remove the blessing and replace it. ELMALILI: Monotony may bore human desire, but seeking variety is not itself sinful. IBNASHUR-FULL: This sentence continues the preceding pattern of recounting God's favors, whether pure favors or favors mixed with ingratitude and subsequent pardon, so its content should also be a favor. IBNASHUR-FULL: A reading transmitted through al-Fakhr and explained by ʿAbd al-Ḥakīm says asking to replace manna and quail was sinful ingratitude: ‘patience’ implies dislike, and the rebuke confirms it; the favor was pardon and the concession to go down. IBNASHUR-FULL: God's answer withdraws special care: instead of providing food, water, and shade as before, He orders them to go to a town and procure their own, a disciplinary rebuke for their attitude rather than punishment for a sinful request. IBNASHUR-FULL: Worldly deprivation and loss of spiritual gifts are not consequences of a legal sin under divine command; they resemble causal ordering in the world's system. Only afterlife punishment proves the act was sinful, resolving the interpretive difficulty. IBNASHUR-FULL: The jussive يخرج replaces an expected أن يخرج, presenting the result as certain if Moses asks and pressing him to act for their benefit. IBNASHUR-FULL: The واء rather than فاء makes the punishment an independently asserted report of what their ingratitude merited, not merely a consequence attached to Moses’s rebuke."}, {"id": "2:61/q05/p2", "position": "The rebuke ce
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
