<<chunk 16, part 2 of 0..5>>
nsures their choice", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو العباس): He derives the root from dwelling or a dwelling place: to bear a sin is to come to occupy the position of the guilty, and the other senses of carrying, returning, and acknowledging converge on settling in a place. RAZI-FULL: Razi says the rhetorical rebuke may concern losing a greater worldly benefit or a greater afterlife benefit, rather than sin in the request itself. RAZI-FULL: The phrase that was because they disobeyed restates the cause in different words, like a master listing a servant's past offenses with varied rebukes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abū Ḥayyān replies that saying they could not endure one food shows a desire for other foods, not necessarily dissatisfaction with what God provided; a rebuke may concern forfeiting worldly or afterlife benefit. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: They wearied of the provision and asked Moses to intercede for familiar foods; he rebuked them for trading precious, effortless manna and quails for laborious, harmful foods that stole worship time and impaired body and perception. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Moses rebukes the Israelites for seeking lowly foods while they enjoyed abundant, pleasant, beneficial provision. ALUSI-FULL: The interrogative rebukes them, and الاستبدال means exchanging one thing for another. IBNASHUR-FULL (موسى): One attribution makes the rebuke beginning أتستبدلون Moses’s speech. IBNASHUR-FULL (الله): Another attribution makes the rebuke beginning أتستبدلون God's speech. IBNASHUR-FULL: The question is a severe rebuke, stripped of persuasion and warning, and expresses astonishment at their foolish choice."}, {"id": "2:61/q05/p3", "position": "Permissible request for lawful variety", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Some say the request was not sinful because both foods were permitted; others say it was sinful because they resented God’s choice, which the author regards as stronger. RAZI-FULL: Razi argues that manna and quail had been permitted rather than commanded, so asking for another food was permissible, including asking through Moses because that seemed likelier to be answered. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Their request was permissible: the earlier eat-and-drink command was permission, so people allowed different foods may reasonably ask for another kind directly or through a messenger. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The response, descend to a town and you will have what you asked, confirms that the request was granted; granting a sinful request would be impermissible for prophets. Against — ALUSI-FULL: The author endorses al-Salikuti's judgment that al-Razi's inference is weak: granting the request does not make their ungrateful demand virtuous. ELMALILI: Monotony may bore human desire, but seeking variety is not itself sinful."}, {"id": "2:61/q05/p4", "position": "Lawful but discourteous request", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: God's answer withdraws special care: instead of providing food, water, and shade as before, He orders them to go to a town and procure their own, a disciplinary rebuke for their attitude rather than punishment for a sinful request."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q06", "question": "How is the final rāʾ of نَّصْبِرَ treated at pause?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q06/p1", "position": "Pause treatment depends on rāʾ and preceding sound", "reasons": "NASHR: A final rāʾ that is open, including نصبر, is stopped on with sukūn only; the author sets out parallel categories for still, transferred-kasra and other final rāʾs. NASHR: When final rāʾ has a permanent lexical or inflectional kasra, pause permits rawm or sukūn; a nominative ending permits rawm, ishāmām, or sukūn. NASHR: At pause with sukūn or ishāmām, tarqīq is the established rule when the preceding sound is kasra, sukūn after kasra, silent yāʾ, imāla, or a soft rāʾ; otherwise the rāʾ is tafkhīm. NASHR: Some soften a rāʾ with its own kasra at pause on the ground that pause makes the preceding state temporary; the author notes a possible distinction between temporary and permanent kasra. NASHR: With rawm, a kasra softens rāʾ for all; a ḍamma is softened only by Warsh through al-Azraq after specified triggers, while other cases are tafkhīm, with some distinction for a kasra ending."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q07", "question": "What was the 'one food,' and why was it called one?", "turns_on": "Whether one describes a repeated regimen, mixed meal, food class, single item, or shared prosperity.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q07/p1", "position": "Manna and quail together", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن أبي نجيح): Ibn Abi Najih says their one food was manna and quail, which they sought to replace with vegetables and the other listed crops. IBNABIHATIM (أبو العالية): The Israelites had quails for food and manna for drink, and said they could not endure that single fare. THALABI: Although manna and quail are two foods, the Arabs can describe two things with the singular “one”; he cites the pearls and coral verse, although they come only from the salt sea. THALABI (عبد الرحمن بن زيد بن أسلم): They kneaded manna and quail together, making one food that they ate. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says manna was their food and quail their drink, but the two were combined when eaten and therefore counted as one food. BAGHAWI-FULL: Although manna and quail are two foods, Arabs may refer to two as one and one as two; the pearl-and-coral verse is an example, though only the salt sea produces them. BAGHAWI-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن زيد بن أسلم): ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn Aslam says they kneaded manna with quail, making one food. KASHSHAF-FULL: The single food means manna and quails, called one because they did not vary; even a varied dailymenu could be called one food if unchanged. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya says all of these grounds together establish the superiority of manna and quail. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says manna and quail are superior in value, since the requested vegetables have little worth. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The Israelites spoke in the wilderness after tiring of manna and quail and recalling their former life in Egypt; the two foods are called one food because they ate them together and repeatedly received the same pair. TABRISI: They say they cannot endure one food: manna and quails are called one because the same daily food repeated from day to day, even if it offered varieties. TABRISI: A further interpretation contrasts farmed and crafted food with manna and quails given freely. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The Israelites said this while in the wilderness; by one food they meant manna and quail. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (محمد بن القاسم): They counted manna and quail as one food because the manna was eaten with quail and the quail with manna. QURTUBI-FULL: Fifth, manna and quail were certainly lawful as gifts from God, whereas dealings in crops could involve usurpation and doubt. QURTUBI-FULL: They called manna and quail one food though they were two because they ate one together with the other. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Another view says the two foods repeated daily, so they were called one regular fare, like a person constant in one practice. BAYDAWI-FULL: The single food they could no longer bear was manna and quails from the wilderness. NASAFI-FULL: The one food was manna and quail; it was called one because it did not change, as a person may call a daily unchanging menu one food despite its variety. NASAFI-FULL: Alternatively, they considered manna and quail one kind because both were refined foods, while they wanted the vegetables and grains familiar to an agricultural people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the Israelites mixed manna and quail, making them like one color that combines several things. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Some take the one food to mean quail, since manna was a drink or sweet accompaniment and only quail counted as food to them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Others compare calling two foods one to calling one source two, as in the verse about pearl and coral coming from two seas although they come only from the salty sea. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another view says they spoke while only one of the two foods was being sent down. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī explains one food as the unchanged manna and quail, which they called one because it did not vary from day to day. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Another explanation is that manna and quail were one class of luxurious fare, while the Israelites as agricultural people wanted familiar varied crops and vegetables. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزجاج): The first explanation measures superiority by value: vegetables are of little worth beside the more valuable manna and quails. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A second explanation says manna and quails were God's gift and commanded food, so continuing to obey and thank Him earned reward in the afterlife, unlike the requested food. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A fourth explanation values freedom from toil: manna and quails came without labor, while crops required cultivation and care. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A fifth explanation values lawful purity: manna and quails came from God free of the defects, usurpation, unlawful elements, and doubts that can affect crops. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A sixth explanation says manna and quails are superior in the kind of nourishment and benefit they provide. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The request refers to the vegetables and grains they chose over manna and quails. SAMIN-DURR: Although manna and quails are two foods, واحد can mean one unchanging, nonvarying kind. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): They may call the two items one because both are luxury foods, whereas they wanted their familiar varied crops. BURSEVI: The paired manna and quail counted as one food because eaten together; alternatively, “one” means an unvaried diet even if it has several dishes. ALUSI-FULL: It is even less plausible that “one food” meant only quails because manna was a drink or sweetener and therefore supposedly did not count as another food. ALUSI-FULL: Their declaration that they could not endure one food signals aversion to the manna and quails an
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
