<<chunk 16, part 3 of 0..5>>
d failure to thank God for an effortless provision. ALUSI-FULL: One food can mean a single, unchanging regimen, even if it consists of the two foods manna and quails. ALUSI-FULL: Another explanation is that the Israelites sought familiar agricultural produce because manna and quails were luxurious foods unlike their usual fare. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): A reported explanation says they cooked manna and quails together, making one dish. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): A reported view says they explicitly sought replacement, and the reply signals that receiving the requested food would mean losing manna and quails rather than combining the foods. IBNASHUR-FULL: The author reads lan as extending negation throughout every time of ‘endure’: they announce they will no longer eat manna and quail, pressuring Moses to ask at once and implying they have made acceptance impossible. IBNASHUR-FULL: They call manna and quail one food because it recurred every day, although it consisted of two things."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p2", "position": "The wilderness fare is called one food", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): The Israelites tired of their single food and remembered their former life, so they asked Moses for produce from the earth. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari recalls that patience means restraining and holding the self back, and interprets the Israelites as saying they could not endure one food. TAB-FULL (بعض أهل التأويل): Some commentators identify the single food God provided in the wilderness as quail. TAB-FULL (وهب بن منبه): Wahb ibn Munabbih instead says the single food was fine bread with meat. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada glosses the requested food as worse than the food God had given them. IBNABIHATIM (السدي): Al-Suddi says they became sated or weary of that food and said they could not endure one fare. IBNABIHATIM: The transmitters explain their phrase as being sated or disliking the food. THALABI: The good and evil may refer to kinds of food, or to God’s choice for them as against their own choices. BAGHAWI-FULL: Another view is that they ate one food together with the other, making them a single meal. RAZI-FULL: A monotonous diet can weaken appetite and digestion; variety can strengthen appetite and increase pleasure, making a change of food reasonable. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj argues that the people would not request food without grain, the foundation of nourishment. QURTUBI-FULL: Fourth, God's food came without effort, while their requested food required cultivation, agriculture, and toil. QURTUBI-FULL: In ordinary usage, a food market means the place where food is sold, not every place selling something edible or drinkable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The author counts nine reported explanations for one food, including the two explanations attributed to al-Zamakhsharī on the preceding page. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: This sequence of five foods follows their differing temperamental qualities. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation takes the request to mean their reliance on managing their own livelihoods and food supplies. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): Another explanation is that they ate one food together with the other, or ate both at the same time. SAMIN-DURR: طعم with ḍamma means the tasted food; Abu Khirash's poem uses الطعم first for the food itself and then for its desirability. BIQAI-FULL: Their request that God bring food is made even if Moses himself is not attending to that matter. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines food as what sustains the eater and becomes part of him, linking the word to the command to look at one's food. BURSEVI: Believers’ recoil from disobeying God resembles one’s recoil from poisoned food. ALUSI-FULL: The author calls it a weak account that the request preceded the descent of the quails. IBNASHUR-FULL: The author finds al-Fakhr's proposed favor very remote because the text never establishes that they actually received the food they requested."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p3", "position": "An unchanging daily regimen", "reasons": "JISHUMI: They call it one food because their daily diet did not change; alternatively Arabic can use the singular for a pair and vice versa, as in the verse about pearls and coral. KASHSHAF-FULL: The single food means manna and quails, called one because they did not vary; even a varied dailymenu could be called one food if unchanged. TABRISI: They say they cannot endure one food: manna and quails are called one because the same daily food repeated from day to day, even if it offered varieties. RAZI-FULL: One food means a single unchanging menu or manner of eating, not a single food species. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Another view says the two foods repeated daily, so they were called one regular fare, like a person constant in one practice. BAYDAWI-FULL: Its oneness means it did not vary or change, as in the expression that an emir's table has one food because its colors do not change. NASAFI-FULL: The one food was manna and quail; it was called one because it did not change, as a person may call a daily unchanging menu one food despite its variety. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī explains one food as the unchanged manna and quail, which they called one because it did not vary from day to day. SAMIN-DURR: Although manna and quails are two foods, واحد can mean one unchanging, nonvarying kind. BIQAI-FULL: Their complaint about one food means they did not want to remain with an unchanging provision, even though it was varied, noble, and effortless. ALUSI-FULL: One food can mean a single, unchanging regimen, even if it consists of the two foods manna and quails. IBNASHUR-FULL: They call manna and quail one food because it recurred every day, although it consisted of two things."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p4", "position": "Quail alone counted as food", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (أبو العالية): The Israelites had quails for food and manna for drink, and said they could not endure that single fare. THALABI: Although manna and quail are two foods, the Arabs can describe two things with the singular “one”; he cites the pearls and coral verse, although they come only from the salt sea. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says manna was their food and quail their drink, but the two were combined when eaten and therefore counted as one food. BAGHAWI-FULL: Although manna and quail are two foods, Arabs may refer to two as one and one as two; the pearl-and-coral verse is an example, though only the salt sea produces them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Some take the one food to mean quail, since manna was a drink or sweet accompaniment and only quail counted as food to them. Against — ALUSI-FULL: It is even less plausible that “one food” meant only quails because manna was a drink or sweetener and therefore supposedly did not count as another food."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p5", "position": "A single mixed or jointly eaten meal", "reasons": "THALABI (عبد الرحمن بن زيد بن أسلم): They kneaded manna and quail together, making one food that they ate. BAGHAWI-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن زيد بن أسلم): ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn Aslam says they kneaded manna with quail, making one food. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the Israelites mixed manna and quail, making them like one color that combines several things. BURSEVI: The paired manna and quail counted as one food because eaten together; alternatively, “one” means an unvaried diet even if it has several dishes. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): A reported explanation says they cooked manna and quails together, making one dish."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p6", "position": "One class of luxury foods", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: They may have tired of eating one kind of food for forty years and wanted something different. NASAFI-FULL: Alternatively, they considered manna and quail one kind because both were refined foods, while they wanted the vegetables and grains familiar to an agricultural people. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Another explanation is that manna and quail were one class of luxurious fare, while the Israelites as agricultural people wanted familiar varied crops and vegetables. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): They may call the two items one because both are luxury foods, whereas they wanted their familiar varied crops. ALUSI-FULL: Another explanation is that the Israelites sought familiar agricultural produce because manna and quails were luxurious foods unlike their usual fare."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p7", "position": "Arabic singular can cover two items", "reasons": "THALABI: Although manna and quail are two foods, the Arabs can describe two things with the singular “one”; he cites the pearls and coral verse, although they come only from the salt sea. JISHUMI: They call it one food because their daily diet did not change; alternatively Arabic can use the singular for a pair and vice versa, as in the verse about pearls and coral. BAGHAWI-FULL: Although manna and quail are two foods, Arabs may refer to two as one and one as two; the pearl-and-coral verse is an example, though only the salt sea produces them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Others compare calling two foods one to calling one source two, as in the verse about pearl and coral coming from two seas although they come only from the salty sea."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p8", "position": "Only one food had yet been sent", "reasons": "TABRISI: An alternative account says only manna first descended; they tired of it and then quails were sent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another explanation says they received manna alone for a period, became tired of it, and then received quail alone and tired of that. Against — ALUSI-FULL: The author calls it a weak account that the request preceded the descent of the quails."}, {"id": "2:61/q07/p9", "position": "A shared condition of abundance", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (قيل): Calling it one food may allude to shared wealth: they did not want everyone to share one thing, since that would leave no one serving another; they were said to be the first to use servants and slaves."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q08", "question": "What does ṭaʿām mean here and in Arabic usage?", "turns_o
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
