<<chunk 17, part 3 of 0..5>>
 of hot, cold, moist, and dry qualities: greens encompass varieties, followed by cucumber, garlic, lentils, and onion. ELMALILI: Israelites say they cannot endure eating one kind of food and ask Moses to pray for produce from the earth, including vegetables, cucumber, garlic, lentils, and onions. ELMALILI: The wording Misr instead of qarya or balad hints that Israel preferred a humiliating condition resembling Egypt for the sake of eating onions and garlic. ELMALILI: The commentary renders qiththā as cucumber and fūm as garlic in the requested list. IBNASHUR-FULL: Fūm most likely means garlic: exchanging ث for ف is common in Arabic, and garlic fits the accompanying produce and the Torah’s list. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: The reading attributed to Abdullah, thūmihā with thāʾ, means garlic and better fits lentils and onions; Arabic speakers can interchange fāʾ and thāʾ. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الكسائي): One reported reading takes al-fūm to mean garlic; al-Kisāʾī and al-Naḍr ibn Shumayl are named for this view, and al-Farrāʾ also chooses it by analogy with fāʾ replacing thāʾ. Against — BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint al-Shāṭiʾ rejects letter substitution as a general proof for garlic, since replacing thāʾ with fāʾ is not a rule that can be analogically extended. STUDYQURAN: The word fūm, rendered garlic, may instead mean wheat."}, {"id": "2:61/q22/p3", "position": "Bread or bread-making grain", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): The word fūm refers to bread. ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة والحسن): They gloss fūm as bread. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Fūm is said to mean wheat and bread. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ says fūm is an old dialect word in the command fūmū, meaning bake bread. TAB-FULL (بعضهم): Some commentators say fūm means wheat and bread. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari says wheat and bread were called fūm in an older Arabic usage, quoting the expression fūmū lanā, meaning bake for us. TAB-FULL (عطاء ومجاهد): ʿAṭāʾ and Mujahid interpret fūm as bread. TAB-FULL (قتادة والحسن): Qatada and al-Hasan say fūm is the grain from which people make bread. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd identifies fūm as bread. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says fūm means wheat and bread. ZAJJAJ: “Fūm” means wheat, and more broadly baked grains; the proposed meaning “garlic” is unknown in Arabic and ill-suited to a request for staple food, since wheat is food’s foundation. “Fūmū lanā” means bake bread for us. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses fūm as bread, and on another occasion as wheat. THALABI (ابن عباس): Fūm means bread; the Arabs say fūmū lanā to mean “bake for us.” MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid, Ibn Zayd, and ʿAtaʾ say fūm means bread. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra says fawm is an old word for wheat and bread; some Arabs also say fummu lana to mean bake bread for us, as in a verse by Ahihah ibn al-Jallah about sowing fawm. JISHUMI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās interprets fūm as bread. BAGHAWI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says fūm means bread. KASHSHAF-FULL: Fūm means wheat, supported by the idiom 'bring us wheat' meaning bake bread. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عطاء وقتادة): Ata and Qatada define fūm as grains suitable for baking, including wheat, fava beans, and lentils. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says fūm means bread. TABRISI (الفراء والأزهري): Al-Farra and al-Azhari say fūm means wheat or bread; Arabs use it to mean bake bread. TABRISI (قوم): Some identify fūm as grains from which bread is baked. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj rejects garlic as an implausible meaning because people would not ask for garlic without bread, the staple. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ says fūm is an old dialect in the request fūmū lanā, meaning bake bread for us. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): Another report from Ibn ʿAbbas interprets fum as bread; this is also transmitted from Mujahid, ʿAta, and Ibn Zayd, and Arabic usage includes fumū lanā meaning bake for us. QURTUBI-FULL (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ calls fūmū lanā an old dialect for 'bake for us'; ʿAṭāʾ and Qatādah define fūm as any grain made into bread. QURTUBI-FULL: Other dialectal explanations make fūm chickpeas in Syrian speech; fāmī is an altered nisbah of fūmī, and fūmū lanā means bake for us. BAYDAWI-FULL: Fūm means wheat, and can also mean bread, as in the phrase ‘bring us bread’; another view takes it to mean garlic. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba chooses the bread interpretation, supported by the cited poem using fūm as a verb for baking. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Other reported definitions make fūm the grains used for baking or bread itself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد وابن عطاء وابن زيد): They interpret فومها as bread. IBNKATHIR-FULL (اللغة القديمة): An older Arabic usage takes fūmū lanā to mean bake bread for us. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): If the baking gloss is correct, Ibn Jarir says fūm is a letter substitution: fāʾ and thāʾ may exchange because their articulation points are close. IBNKATHIR-FULL (آخرون): Another group interprets fūm as wheat, the grain from which bread is made. IBNKATHIR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid and Ata interpret fūm as bread. BIQAI-FULL: The author identifies fūm as wheat, while Al-Harali explains it as grain used for baking bread. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses fum as bread, with another wording identifying it as wheat in the Banu Hashim dialect. DURR-FULL (مجاهد وعطاء): Mujahid and Ata identify fum as bread. DURR-FULL (الحسن وأبو مالك): Hasan and Abu Malik also give bread as a meaning of fum. ALUSI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the language authorities agree that الفوم means wheat and other grains used for baking. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas is quoted as identifying الفوم with bread; the author says this can be understood as a word also applied to bread, though bread is unlikely here because it grows neither from earth nor alongside greens. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الفراء): Al-Farra says fūm in an old dialect can mean both wheat and bread; Arabs also used fawwimū lanā to mean bake for us."}, {"id": "2:61/q22/p4", "position": "Edible grain generally", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (قتادة والحسن): Qatada and al-Hasan say fūm is the grain from which people make bread. THALABI: An unnamed view takes fūm to mean all grains. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says fawm means wheat, or grain generally, and rejects garlic as unknown and implausible because the people sought staple food containing grain. JISHUMI (القتبي): Al-Qutaybī interprets fūm as all grains. BAGHAWI-FULL (القتيبي): Al-Qutaybi says fūm means all edible grains. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عطاء وقتادة): Ata and Qatada define fūm as grains suitable for baking, including wheat, fava beans, and lentils. QURTUBI-FULL (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ calls fūmū lanā an old dialect for 'bake for us'; ʿAṭāʾ and Qatādah define fūm as any grain made into bread. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن قتيبة، والزجاج): Ibn Qutayba and al-Zajjāj say fūm means edible grains. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Other reported definitions make fūm the grains used for baking or bread itself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation takes فومها to mean all grains. IBNKATHIR-FULL (آخرون): Another group interprets fūm as wheat, the grain from which bread is made. IBNKATHIR-FULL (البخاري): Al-Bukhari reports a view that fūm means all grains people eat. ALUSI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the language authorities agree that الفوم means wheat and other grains used for baking."}, {"id": "2:61/q22/p5", "position": "A reported sense of fūm", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Another reported interpretation takes fūm to mean grains. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The verse asks whether the Israelites would exchange the inferior herbs, cucumbers, fūm, lentils, and onions for the better manna and quail. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة، الزجاج): A third interpretation says fūm means grains. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مؤرج): Muʾarrij’s quotation of Ḥassān’s verse glosses its food words as fūm and onion. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says he follows Zayd's recitation but adopts about fourteen letters from Ibn Masud's reading, including this phrase. DURR-FULL (أمية بن أبي الصلت): Umayya b. Abi al-Salt uses fum in poetry while describing their former homes, gardens, and onions."}, {"id": "2:61/q22/p6", "position": "Chickpeas", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Other dialectal explanations make fūm chickpeas in Syrian speech; fāmī is an altered nisbah of fūmī, and fūmū lanā means bake for us. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another view identifies fūm as chickpea in a Syrian dialect; its seller is called fāmī, a nisba form from fūmī, like shahli and dahri. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation takes فومها to mean chickpeas. IBNASHUR-FULL (قيل): Another reported interpretation takes fūm to mean chickpeas in the dialect of the people of Syria."}, {"id": "2:61/q22/p7", "position": "Other lexical senses", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قطرب): Quṭrub gives fūm three senses: an onion cluster, a large piece of meat, or a large mouthful."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q23", "question": "What rulings are drawn about garlic and onion?", "turns_on": "Sound reports permitting the foods versus the congregational-prayer argument and the mosque-odor rule.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q23/p1", "position": "The Prophet disliked the smell", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (جابر): Jābir reports that the Prophet told a companion to eat greens after finding them in a pot, explaining that he privately converses with one the companion does not; Muslim and Abū Dāwūd transmit it. QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurṭubī takes Jābir's report to show the restriction was particular to the Prophet, while others may eat these foods. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو أيوب): Abū Ayyūb served the Prophet food with garlic; asked whether it was forbidden, the Prophet said no, but that he disliked it. Muslim records the report."}, {"id": "2:61/q23/p2", "position": "Eaters must avoid the mosque until the odor is removed", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: These reports suggest a personal restriction because the Prophet alone was singled out for conversation with the angel. QURTUBI-FULL (جابر): Jābir's report establishes the shared rule: anyone eating garlic, onion, or leek must not approach the mosque because ang
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
