<<chunk 17, part 4 of 0..5>>
els are harmed by what harms people. QURTUBI-FULL (عمر بن الخطاب): In a report transmitted by Muslim, ʿUmar says the Prophet removed people smelling of onion or garlic from the mosque to al-Baqīʿ and ordered eaters to cook them thoroughly."}, {"id": "2:61/q23/p3", "position": "Eating garlic and onion is lawful", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور العلماء): Most scholars permit eating onions, garlic, and other foul-smelling greens because sound reports establish their permissibility. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abū Saʿīd reports the Prophet saying at Khaybar that he does not prohibit what God made lawful but dislikes the smell of garlic."}, {"id": "2:61/q23/p4", "position": "They are prohibited under the congregational prayer argument", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (طائفة من أهل الظاهر): Some literalists who hold congregational prayer obligatory prohibit these foods, arguing that deliberately doing what prevents an obligation is forbidden and the Prophet called them foul. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abū Saʿīd reports the Prophet saying at Khaybar that he does not prohibit what God made lawful but dislikes the smell of garlic."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q24", "question": "What reports and uses are cited for lentils?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q24/p1", "position": "Reports commend lentils and describe their use", "reasons": "THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report from ʿAlī praises lentils as blessed and purifying, softening the heart and increasing tears; it says seventy prophets blessed them, with Jesus the last. QURTUBI-FULL (علي بن أبي طالب): A report attributed to ʿAlī from the Prophet calls lentils blessed and sanctified, softening the heart and increasing tears, and says seventy prophets including Jesus blessed them. QURTUBI-FULL (عمر بن عبد العزيز): ʿUmar b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz alternated bread with oil, meat, and lentils on successive days. QURTUBI-FULL (الحليمي): Al-Ḥalīmī calls lentils and olive oil food of the righteous; their connection with Abraham's hospitality is itself a virtue, and lentils ease worship without stirring desire like meat. QURTUBI-FULL: Wheat is the soundest identification of fūm, barley was close and fed Medina, and lentils were food in Abraham's town, linking the grains to the two prophets. QURTUBI-FULL: A report says the Prophet and his household never ate their fill of wheat bread for three consecutive days from his arrival in Medina until his death."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q25", "question": "What does ʿadas mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q25/p1", "position": "The familiar lentil", "reasons": "TABRISI: ʿAdas means the familiar lentil grain. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: ʿAdas is the familiar lentil; ʿAdas is also a proper name and a command used to urge a mule. BURSEVI: Lentils are a familiar seed whose measure by volume matches its weight. BURSEVI: The verse permits eating wholesome and pleasurable foods; the Prophet liked sweets and honey and drank cool, sweet water, while lentils and oil are foods of the righteous."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q26", "question": "What does baṣal mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q26/p1", "position": "Onion", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari prefers the partitive reading: they asked for some of the earth's produce; he also says the listed plants, gourds, lentils, and onions were familiar crops and seeds. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says they were people accustomed to leeks, onions, and lentils, and their appetites returned to their bad old habits. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Baṣal simply means onion. BURSEVI: Onion is a familiar green used to flavor cooking pots. ALUSI-FULL: Another rationale is that the list starts with food eaten without fire, then gives foods that should be cooked; onion may become cold and moist after cooking according to some."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q27", "question": "Who speaks the rebuke and descent command?", "turns_on": "Whether the pronoun resumes Moses or introduces God's answer.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q27/p1", "position": "The speaker is disputed", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (جماعة من أهل العربية): A group of Arabic grammarians denies that min can be redundant, arguing that it always signals that the speaker intends some of what follows. TABRISI (أبو علي): Abu Ali argues that the hamzated form of nabiʾ preserves the word's original hamza, supported by Hijazi speakers who pronounce it. TABRISI: Supplication is a request addressed by a speaker to someone above him; its distinction from a command lies in the speakers' rank. SAMIN-DURR: The alif in باء is from wāw, as shown by باء يبوء and the pattern قال يقول; باء means to return, and the prophetic wording أبوء بنعمتك علي illustrates it. BURHAN (النحاة والبيانيون): Grammarians and rhetoricians differ over whether an affirmative question used for acknowledgment asserts a fact or seeks the addressee’s admission despite the speaker already knowing it. ALUSI-FULL: The pause after خبر is sufficient under the same-speaker analysis and complete under the two-speaker analysis."}, {"id": "2:61/q27/p2", "position": "Moses spoke", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: The verse omits the intervening events: Moses prayed to his Lord, received an answer, and then told them to descend. BAYDAWI-FULL: The speaker of ‘he said’ may be God or Moses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The pronoun in قال most naturally refers to Moses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If Moses said أتستبدلون, the narrative omits that he prayed and God answered before the command هبطوا. ALUSI-FULL: The question أتستبدلون is a fresh sentence answering the implied question of what Moses or God said. ALUSI-FULL: If both sentences are spoken by the same speaker, their separation has the stated grammatical rationale; if Moses and God speak them separately, the lack of conjunction is self-explanatory."}, {"id": "2:61/q27/p3", "position": "God spoke", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: The speaker of ‘he said’ may be God or Moses. ALUSI-FULL: The question أتستبدلون is a fresh sentence answering the implied question of what Moses or God said. ALUSI-FULL: If both sentences are spoken by the same speaker, their separation has the stated grammatical rationale; if Moses and God speak them separately, the lack of conjunction is self-explanatory."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q28", "question": "What does the exchange wording mean and how is it constructed?", "turns_on": "The transmitted variant and which term the bāʾ marks as relinquished.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q28/p1", "position": "Istibdāl replaces one thing with another", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: If the variant is authentic, al-Tabari explains the f/thāʾ difference as letter substitution caused by nearby articulation points, citing Arabic word pairs. QURTUBI-FULL: Istibdāl means putting one thing in place of another, as with badal. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Neither consonant substitution is productive: thāʾ may become fāʾ and fāʾ may become thāʾ, as in athāfī/athāthī. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The interrogative hamza in أتستبدلون expresses denial, and istibdāl means taking something in exchange. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (شاعر): The cited poetic form سأيلتهم is analyzed as the hamzated ساءلتهم with a yāʾ substitution; the poet combines the substitute with the hamza it replaces under metrical pressure. SAMIN-DURR: Qalun's omission of hamza in the two al-Ahzab positions follows his treatment of two adjacent hamzas: a preceding long vowel triggers substitution and assimilation, as in بالسوء إلا. IBNASHUR-FULL: The s and t in استبدل intensify the action rather than request it, as in استغنى, استجاب, and استكبر. IBNASHUR-FULL: استبدل derives from بدل; Arabic uses several augmented derivatives, while a simple unaugmented verb is unattested. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو الشيص): Abū al-Shayṣ’s verse illustrates بدل taking من for the thing exchanged away. IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr sees no difference among بدل, تبدل, and استبدل in this construction; he finds al-Kashshāf’s account unsupported by lexicographers or its own al-Asās."}, {"id": "2:61/q28/p2", "position": "Direct object taken, bāʾ phrase relinquished", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (المهدوي| rejects):  BIQAI-FULL: The author notes that b-d-l has many constructions: the two things exchanged may be mentioned or omitted, the preposition may mark what is relinquished or received, and the verb may take one or two objects with differing senses. BURSEVI: The exchange preposition attaches to what is relinquished, and manna and quail are better for taste, ease, and other reasons than the requested produce. IBNASHUR-FULL: In the common construction with باء, the direct object is what is taken and the باء phrase what is given; here the lesser food is taken for the better food. IBNASHUR-FULL (الكشاف): Al-Kashshāf treats بدل as having a باء construction in which the given and taken items are reversed from تبدل and استبدل; Qutb and al-Taftāzānī develop variants of this analysis. BINTSHATI-IJAZ: Bint al-Shati notes that in substitution constructions the preposition bi enters the thing relinquished, as in exchanging the lower for the better."}, {"id": "2:61/q28/p3", "position": "Ubayy's atubaddilūn variant", "reasons": "THALABI: Ubayy’s codex reads atubaddilūn in place of atastabdilūn. ALUSI-FULL (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy read أتبدلون; this is figurative because God effects the change, but their request causes it, so they are described as exchangers."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q29", "question": "What is inferior and what is better, and why?", "turns_on": "Value, taste, benefit, effortless certainty, divine reward, or freedom from captivity.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q29/p1", "position": "Manna and quail are better than requested produce", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Dropping hamza is better: hamzated faʿīl forms usually pluralize as faʿlāʾ, whereas weak-root forms take afʿilāʾ; the latter pattern is possible with sound roots but rare. NAHHAS: Though some derive أدنى as inferior or nearer, the best meaning is what is closer in worldly life compared with what is better in the afterlife because of its reward. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Moses calls the requested food lower and wo
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
