<<chunk 17, part 1 of 0..5>>
of cucumber. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The من in من بقلها marks kind, and بقلها is an apposition repeating the preposition; baql includes all plants the earth grows, and qithāʾ is plural of qithʾa. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (بعض المفسرين): Min explains the kind meant: the Israelites ask for vegetables and cucumbers among what the earth grows. QURTUBI-FULL: Qithāʾ can form qithāʾī, is a wāw-root, and aqthaʾa can mean to feed people it. QURTUBI-FULL: Min bāqlihā is an appositive for mā with the preposition repeated; qiththāʾ and the remaining foods are coordinated with it. QURTUBI-FULL: The verse asks whether they exchange inferior herbs, cucumbers, grain, lentils, and onions for the better manna and quail. NASAFI-FULL: Qiththa means cucumber. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الخليل): Al-Khalīl identifies qithāʾ as cucumber. SAMIN-DURR: قثاء is the familiar cucumber; its singular is قثاءة, following the قمح/قمحة pattern. SAMIN-DURR: The hamza in قثاء is original, as in أقثأت الأرض when cucumbers become abundant; its pattern is فعال. SAMIN-DURR: قثاء may have the plural قثائي, like علباء and علابي. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Some derive قثاء from a waw-root and cite أقثأت القوم and فثأت القدر; the author calls this a gross error because the expected forms would instead preserve the waw-derived pattern, with yāʾ substitution in the four-letter verb. BURSEVI: Qiththāʾ is related to qathd and resembles cucumber. BURSEVI: Baql denotes edible greens such as mint, celery, and leek; qiththāʾ is a cucumber-like plant. ALUSI-FULL: The familiar qiththa is identified as cucumber; al-Khalil also says it means cucumber."}, {"id": "2:61/q20/p2", "position": "Original hamza in the root", "reasons": "NAHHAS: The plural of قثاء is قثائي, like علباء/علابي; قثاء belongs to hamza-root words, as shown by أقثأت القوم. SAMIN-DURR: The hamza in قثاء is original, as in أقثأت الأرض when cucumbers become abundant; its pattern is فعال. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Some derive قثاء from a waw-root and cite أقثأت القوم and فثأت القدر; the author calls this a gross error because the expected forms would instead preserve the waw-derived pattern, with yāʾ substitution in the four-letter verb."}, {"id": "2:61/q20/p3", "position": "A wāw-root derivation", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Qithāʾ can form qithāʾī, is a wāw-root, and aqthaʾa can mean to feed people it. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): Some derive قثاء from a waw-root and cite أقثأت القوم and فثأت القدر; the author calls this a gross error because the expected forms would instead preserve the waw-derived pattern, with yāʾ substitution in the four-letter verb. Against — SAMIN-DURR: The author rejects that waw-root argument: it should produce أقثيت from أقثوت and فثوت القدر, and the poem should say نفثوها, not نفثؤها."}, {"id": "2:61/q20/p4", "position": "A related lexical or morphological form", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (الجعدي): Al-Jaʿdī's poetry uses nafthāʾ for calming a boiling pot by adding water, illustrating the root's sense of calming. QURTUBI-FULL: The f-th-ʾ root also means calming anger, tiring from running, or heat subsiding; the proverb says sour curdled milk calms anger. QURTUBI-FULL: Rathīʾah is milk curdled by milking it onto sour milk; irtathaʾa means the milk thickened."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q21", "question": "What report is cited about eating cucumber?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q21/p1", "position": "Cucumber with dates aided weight gain", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (عائشة): ʿĀʾishah says her mother succeeded in fattening her for introduction to the Prophet only after feeding her cucumber with fresh dates; al-Qurṭubī grades the chain sound."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q22", "question": "What does fūm mean here?", "turns_on": "Arabic usage and poetry, the thūm reading, consonant interchange, and fit with neighboring foods.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q22/p1", "position": "Wheat or ears of wheat", "reasons": "IBNHISHAM (ابن هشام): Ibn Hishām glosses fūm as wheat and cites Umayya ibn Abī al-Ṣalt’s poem as evidence. IBNHISHAM (ابن هشام): In the cited poem, al-wudhayl means pieces of silver; fūm means wheat, whose singular is fūma. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Fūm is said to mean wheat and bread. TAB-FULL (بعضهم): Some commentators say fūm means wheat and bread. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says fūm means wheat in the language of Banu Hashim. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas also identifies fūm as wheat and cites Aḥīḥa ibn al-Jallāḥ's poem mentioning fūm cultivation. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari says wheat and bread were called fūm in an older Arabic usage, quoting the expression fūmū lanā, meaning bake for us. TAB-FULL (أبو مالك): Abu Malik identifies fūm as wheat. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi identifies fūm as wheat. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says fūm means wheat and bread. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): A report from Ibn Abbas through al-Dahhak identifies fūm specifically as wheat. ZAJJAJ: “Fūm” means wheat, and more broadly baked grains; the proposed meaning “garlic” is unknown in Arabic and ill-suited to a request for staple food, since wheat is food’s foundation. “Fūmū lanā” means bake bread for us. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses fūm as bread, and on another occasion as wheat. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains fūm as wheat and cites Uhayha ibn al-Halah's verse as lexical evidence for the word. IBNABIHATIM: The author says Mujahid, al-Hasan, Abu Malik, Ikrima, Ata, al-Suddi, and Qatada likewise interpret fūm as wheat, while others differ. THALABI (عطاء وأبو مالك): Fūm means wheat in an old language; the cited poem uses fūm in the context of farming. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Fūm means wheat, according to Ibn Abbas, Qatada, and al-Suddi; Ibn Abbas cites Uhayha ibn al-Jallah's poem as evidence for the word. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra says fawm is an old word for wheat and bread; some Arabs also say fummu lana to mean bake bread for us, as in a verse by Ahihah ibn al-Jallah about sowing fawm. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says fawm means wheat, or grain generally, and rejects garlic as unknown and implausible because the people sought staple food containing grain. WAHIDI-BASIT (اللحياني): Al-Lihyani says fum and thum both refer to wheat. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن دريد، المبرد): Ibn Durayd says the Azd of al-Sarat call the wheat ear fawm; al-Mubarrad chooses this explanation. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The one food was manna and quail together; baql means plants without lasting stems, qiththa a kind of vegetable, and fūm wheat. JISHUMI (الحسن وقتادة وعطاء ومجاهد): Al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, ʿAṭāʾ, and Mujāhid interpret fūm as wheat; al-Mubarrad also prefers this meaning. BAGHAWI-FULL: One explanation makes wheat lower in value than manna and quail even though it is better; another says it is lower because it is ordinarily easier to obtain. BAGHAWI-FULL (عطاء): ʿAta says fūm means wheat. KASHSHAF-FULL: Fūm means wheat, supported by the idiom 'bring us wheat' meaning bake bread. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عطاء وقتادة): Ata and Qatada define fūm as grains suitable for baking, including wheat, fava beans, and lentils. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says fūm means garlic, supported by Ubayy ibn Kaʿb's reading with thāʾ and a report from Ibn Abbas; Ibn Atiyya prefers wheat because consonant substitution is not analogically productive. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya prefers the wheat interpretation; Ibn Abbas's poetic citation supports it by using fūm for wheat. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas cites Uhayha ibn al-Jallah's poem as evidence that fūm means wheat. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن دريد): Ibn Durayd says fūm means either crops or wheat, and the Azd of al-Sarat call ears of grain fūm. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس وأكثر المفسرين): Ibn Abbas and most exegetes say fūm means wheat. TABRISI: The cited verse depicts fūm as a crop cultivated in Medina. TABRISI (الفراء والأزهري): Al-Farra and al-Azhari say fūm means wheat or bread; Arabs use it to mean bake bread. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس، السدي عن أشياخه، الحسن، أبو مالك): One interpretation of fūm is wheat. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): One report from Ibn ʿAbbas interprets fum as wheat. RAZI-FULL: Supporters of the garlic interpretation cite the Ibn Masʿud reading thumihā, argue that wheat could not be inferior to manna and quail, and note garlic's fit with lentils and onions. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās and most exegetes identify fūm as wheat; al-Naḥḥās prefers this view because its support is stronger and its chains sound. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās answered a questioner who said fūm means wheat by citing a line of Uḥayḥah b. al-Jallāḥ about wheat cultivation. QURTUBI-FULL (الجوهري): Al-Jawharī defines fūm as wheat and al-Akhfash cites a supporting wheat-cultivation poem. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن دريد): Ibn Durayd says fūmah means an ear of wheat and cites a line describing ears in a scout's hand. BAYDAWI-FULL: Fūm means wheat, and can also mean bread, as in the phrase ‘bring us bread’; another view takes it to mean garlic. NASAFI-FULL (ابن مسعود): Fum means either wheat or garlic; Ibn Masud's reading has thum, garlic. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو مالك وجماعة): Abū Mālik and a group identify fūm as wheat; the cited Uḥayḥa ibn al-Jallāḥ poem speaks of cultivating it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (المبرد): The wheat meaning is identified as Egyptian usage and is al-Mubarrad’s preferred interpretation; al-Farrāʾ calls it an ancient dialect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عبيدة، وابن دريد): Abū ʿUbayda and Ibn Durayd define fūm as an ear of grain; Abū ʿUbayda specifies that this is the Asad dialect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة والسدي): They interpret فومها as wheat. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A final interpretation takes فومها to mean a grain ear or spike. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عباس): A second interpretation of الفوم is wheat, supported by a verse of poetry Ibn Abbas recited about farming فوم. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas also explains fūm as wheat in the dialect of Banu Hashim. IBNKATHIR-FULL (آخرون): Another group interprets fūm as wheat, the grain from which bread is made. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says fūm means wheat and cites the poet Ahiha ibn al-Jallah,
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
