<<chunk 17, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:61/q16", "question": "How is growth attributed to the earth?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q16/p1", "position": "Growth is figuratively attributed to earth while God causes it", "reasons": "THALABI: The requested items are the plants of the earth. TABRISI: Inbāt means bringing forth plants and derives from the sense of appearing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The hamza in inbāt is causative: the word means bringing out something whose nature is to grow. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو البقاء): Abū al-Baqāʾ rejects the verbal-noun analysis because an omitted concrete object cannot be described by a verbal noun; saying the earth grows is figurative, since God causes growth and the earth only receives it. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali glosses the earth's producing as nourishment and growth. ALUSI-FULL: The literal reading would require the earth to be an extractor and make the statement nonsensical. ALUSI-FULL: Attributing growth to the earth is figurative, treating the receptacle as the agent; God placed the receptive capacity in the clay layer of the earth. ALUSI-FULL: Locating the receptive power in the seed rather than the soil could lead to the claim that seeds have existed eternally as a kind."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q17", "question": "How is مِنۢ بَقْلِهَا related to the preceding phrase?", "turns_on": "Partitive, explanatory, or circumstantial min and the limits of apposition.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q17/p1", "position": "Partitive min in apposition", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The appositive analysis fails if the first من is partitive but the second is explanatory, since the two particles then differ in meaning. ALUSI-FULL (أبو حيان): Abu Hayyan instead takes the second من as partitive, in apposition to ما, with the phrase attached directly to يخرج. ALUSI-FULL (الساليكوتي): Al-Salikuti says both parsings imply that they sought only some of the listed items; treating the second من as explanatory alongside the first partitive would lose that meaning and suggest all items."}, {"id": "2:61/q17/p2", "position": "Explanatory min", "reasons": "Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The appositive analysis fails if the first من is partitive but the second is explanatory, since the two particles then differ in meaning. ALUSI-FULL (المولى عصام الدين): Mawla ʿIsam al-Din's explanatory parsing would leave the wording implying that all listed plants were requested, since there is no prior specification. ALUSI-FULL: The second من may be explanatory, with the phrase functioning as a circumstantial expression meaning “being among the greens.”"}, {"id": "2:61/q17/p3", "position": "A circumstantial phrase", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: The listed crops explain the preceding phrase as a circumstantial clarification; another analysis treats them as an appositive with the preposition repeated."}, {"id": "2:61/q17/p4", "position": "An appositive with repeated preposition", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: الذي is singular because it points back to the food and to ما in مما تنبت; agreement with the appositive would instead require a feminine plural."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q18", "question": "What does baql mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q18/p1", "position": "Fresh plants and edible greens", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): When they reached Syria and missed their former foods, they asked Moses to seek vegetables from the earth for them. NAHHAS: من بقلها is appositional with a repeated preposition; وقثائها is coordinated with it. WAHIDI-BASIT: Baql is any plant that does not retain a stalk after livestock graze it. KASHSHAF-FULL: Alternatively, the two foods were one kind because both belonged to luxurious eating, while the farming people wanted their familiar varied grains and vegetables. TABRISI: Baql is spring growth and, more specifically, any plant without a stem; both baqalat and abqalat are eloquent forms for the earth's producing it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Baql is a collective noun; they meant vegetables. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو منصور اللغوي): Against a popular narrow usage, baql means herbage and spring growth eaten by both people and animals. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو النجم): Abu al-Najm’s poem uses tabaqqalat for camels grazing at the first sprouting of vegetation. BAYDAWI-FULL: Baql means plants grown by the earth; here it refers to the choicest edible greens. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن دريد): Baql is a genus covering fresh growth eaten by people and animals; the land verbs mean that the land has become vegetated, and Ibn Durayd connects al-bāqillāʾ to it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The phrase من بقلها is an appositive to مما تنبت الأرض with the preposition repeated, a fluent construction. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa allows من بقلها to explain the kind and treats it as an accusative circumstantial phrase from an omitted pronoun. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (المهدوي وابن عطية): Al-Mahdawi and Ibn Atiyya call من بقلها an appositive even though they take the two prepositions to have different senses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): The greens mean choice vegetables people eat, such as mint, celery, and leek. SAMIN-DURR: من بقلها may be an appositive to ما with the preposition repeated, where من explains the kind. SAMIN-DURR: بقل is all plant growth without a stem, and its plural is بقول. IBNKATHIR-FULL (عبد الله بن مسعود): Ibn Masud reports that Israelites killed three hundred prophets in one day, then sold vegetables in the market at day's end. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says baql is the growth of the earth that supplements fatty foods; the author first identifies it as greens. DURR-FULL (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud says Israelites killed three hundred prophets in a day and sold vegetables in the market by evening. BURSEVI: The “min” in “from its greens” is explanatory and functions circumstantially with the pronoun. ALUSI-FULL: Baql is a generic term for fresh plants eaten by people or animals; here it means edible herbs and greens. IBNASHUR-FULL: إخراج means bringing forth from the earth; من is partitive, explanatory, or partitive twice, and من بقلها may be circumstantial or an apposition to ما تنبت."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q19", "question": "How is qiththāʾ pronounced?", "turns_on": "Hijazi kasra and Tamim ḍamma dialects and their transmitters.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q19/p1", "position": "Ḍamma on qāf", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Al-qithāʾ has two dialectal forms; some readers pronounce its possessive form with ḍamma, while the more common and better reading has kasra. NAHHAS (طلحة ويحيى بن وثاب): They read وقثائها with ḍamma on qāf. THALABI (يحيى بن وثاب، وطلحة بن مصرف، والأشيب العقيلي): These readers pronounce qiththāʾihā with ḍamma on qāf, a Tamim dialect. JISHUMI (قراءة العامة): The common reading has qiththā with kasra on qāf; Yaḥyā ibn Waththāb uses ḍamma, a Tamīm dialect. KASHSHAF-FULL: A variant reading vocalizes the word for cucumbers with a damma. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طلحة بن مصرف ويحيى بن وثاب): Talha ibn Musarrif and Yahya ibn Waththab read قثائها with a damma on the qaf. TABRISI (عيسى الثقفي): Isa al-Thaqafi is reported to have the anomalous reading with damma on qaf in qiththa. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Qiththāʾ has both kasra and damma on its first consonant; the kasra is better and is the majority reading. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن مسعود، أبو رجاء، قتادة، طلحة بن مصرف، الأعمش): These readers pronounce qiththāʾ with damma on the qāf. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): The kasra pronunciation is Hijazi; the damma pronunciation belongs to Tamim and some of Banu Asad. RAZI-FULL: The usual reading has qithāʾihā with qaf kasra; al-Aʿmash and Talha read it with qaf ḍamma. QURTUBI-FULL: Baql is any plant without a stem, while a tree has one; qiththāʾ is cucumber, and Yaḥyā b. Waththāb and Ṭalḥah read its qāf with ḍamma, a less common variant. BAYDAWI-FULL: A reading pronounces qiththā with ḍamma, a dialectal form. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qithāʾ is a generic noun whose singular is qithāʾa, with qāf either ḍamma or kasra; maqthaʾa means land rich in it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (يحيى بن وثاب وطلحة بن مصرف): They read وقثائها with a ḍamma on qāf, which is an established dialect form. SAMIN-DURR: المقثأة and المقثؤة, with fatḥa or ḍamma on tāʾ, name a place where cucumbers grow. SAMIN-DURR (قرئ): The usual pronunciation of قثاء has kasra on qāf, and another reading uses ḍamma. ALUSI-FULL (يحيى بن وثاب وغيره): Yahya ibn Waththab and others read قثاء with damma on qaf, a dialect form."}, {"id": "2:61/q19/p2", "position": "Kasra on qāf", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Al-qithāʾ has two dialectal forms; some readers pronounce its possessive form with ḍamma, while the more common and better reading has kasra. THALABI: The common reading has qiththāʾihā with kasra on qāf. JISHUMI (قراءة العامة): The common reading has qiththā with kasra on qāf; Yaḥyā ibn Waththāb uses ḍamma, a Tamīm dialect. TABRISI: Qiththa has two pronunciations, with kasra on qaf preferred and identified as Quranic usage. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Qiththāʾ has both kasra and damma on its first consonant; the kasra is better and is the majority reading. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): The kasra pronunciation is Hijazi; the damma pronunciation belongs to Tamim and some of Banu Asad. RAZI-FULL: The usual reading has qithāʾihā with qaf kasra; al-Aʿmash and Talha read it with qaf ḍamma. QURTUBI-FULL: Baql is any plant without a stem, while a tree has one; qiththāʾ is cucumber, and Yaḥyā b. Waththāb and Ṭalḥah read its qāf with ḍamma, a less common variant. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Qithāʾ is a generic noun whose singular is qithāʾa, with qāf either ḍamma or kasra; maqthaʾa means land rich in it. SAMIN-DURR (قرئ): The usual pronunciation of قثاء has kasra on qāf, and another reading uses ḍamma."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q20", "question": "What does qiththāʾ mean and how is it formed?", "turns_on": "Lexical sense and the dispute over an original hamza or a wāw root.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q20/p1", "position": "Cucumber", "reasons": "NAHHAS: The plural of قثاء is قثائي, like علباء/علابي; قثاء belongs to hamza-root words, as shown by أقثأت القوم. JISHUMI: Baql means any plant without a stalk, and qiththā is a kind 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
