<<chunk 17, part 5 of 0..5>>
rse than the higher, better food they had. DAMGHANI: Adnā means inferior or lesser: the Israelites are asking to exchange food inferior to manna and quail for what is better. JISHUMI (موسى): One report says Moses spoke the rebuke about exchanging the better food for the lower; another says God spoke it. JISHUMI: One interpretation says they were leaving better food for worse; another says they rejected God’s choice for their own, making the rhetorical question a prohibition. JISHUMI: Other readings explain adnā as “closer” in ease of access, or say they exchanged inferior food for tastier food. JISHUMI (الحسن): Though they valued manna and quail, their taste had been formed by onions and lentils, so they longed for familiar food. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Better” may refer to God's choice for them as superior to their own choice. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Their divine origin makes their lawfulness certain, whereas produce acquired through commerce or usurpation can involve doubtful status. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Manna and quail are better because God supplied and commanded them, so continuing to obey and thank Him earns a reward stored for the afterlife; the requested food lacks these qualities. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Manna and quail may be better in taste and pleasure, since vegetables are inferior in this respect. IBNATIYYA-FULL: They require no labor, whereas the requested crops require cultivation and toil. TABRISI: One view makes Moses ask whether they exchange the better food God chose for what is lower and worse; another makes God say it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Adnā means lower or worse, while khayr means higher; manna and quail were better than what the people requested. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj considers leaving the hamza the better form; nabi may derive from informing or from rising in rank. RAZI-FULL: People may prefer food familiar from their upbringing, even if inferior, to unfamiliar food that is more excellent. RAZI-FULL: An objection takes Moses' question about replacing better with inferior food as an explicit condemnation proving the request sinful. RAZI-FULL: The comparison does not rank the foods' taste universally, since a food delightful to one people may be inferior to another; it concerns the certainty and effortless availability of manna and quail versus the requested foods. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج): First, al-Zajjāj says manna and quail are better because the requested vegetables have little worth by comparison. BAYDAWI-FULL: The better food means manna and quails, superior in pleasure, benefit, and freedom from the need to work for food. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أكثر أهل الظاهر من المفسرين): Most outward commentators regard the request as sinful because they disliked the manna and quail, Moses called their requested food inferior, and his question rebuked them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: They asked Moses because a prophet’s prayer is more likely to be answered; they had eaten the same food for forty years, were unused to it, and preferred familiar foods even when inferior. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A third explanation grounds the comparison in taste and pleasure: manna and quails are better tasting than the vegetables requested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The six explanations locate superiority in value, obedience and reward, pleasure, effort, lawfulness, or the kind of food. IBNKATHIR-FULL: God reminds Israel of the pleasant, nourishing, easy provision of manna and quails, then rebukes their weariness and request to replace it with inferior produce. BIQAI-FULL: Moses' question rebukes them for exchanging what is lower in rank for what is better. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): The Israelites wanted to exchange manna and quail for the greens and foods they listed. ALUSI-FULL: The better food is manna and quails; its superiority lies in greater value, taste, benefit, ease of acquisition, and freedom from doubt about its lawfulness. ALUSI-FULL: The speaker may be God speaking through Moses, which suits the surrounding enumeration of blessings, or Moses himself, which better fits the discourse sequence. STUDYQURAN (commentators): The better food refers to manna and quails, while the lesser food means the items the Israelites requested."}, {"id": "2:61/q29/p2", "position": "God's choice is better than their own", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatada interprets “lower” as worse; al-Hasan gave the same interpretation. JISHUMI (ابن السراج): Duʿāʾ may derive from calling out; its essential form is a request from someone lower to someone above, unlike a command, which reflects rank. IBNATIYYA-FULL (غيره): Another derives it from dūn, lower: its original form أدون is reshaped to أفلع, with final wāw changing to alif. IBNATIYYA-FULL: They may be superior as nourishment and benefit. QURTUBI-FULL (النبي محمد): The Prophet described Zamzam as nourishment for the hungry and a cure for illness. QURTUBI-FULL: The verb ṭaʿima means to eat or taste; it means 'taste' in 2:249 and 'eat' in 33:53. BURHAN: Al-Zarkashi says this contradicts the rhetoricians’ consensus: the cited questions refer to past actions; no evidence supports future reference, and the grammar of أتقتلون does not determine the intended time. BURHAN: For rhetorical questions used in negative forms, the interrogative may disappear entirely, remain alongside another sense, or allow either reading; context decides. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali warns Muslims against imitating Israel by trading higher, wholesome provision receivedfreely for lower forbidden or doubtful worldly gains. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines supplication as a humble, needy call requesting what necessity demands from the one who can provide it, unlike a command from a higher authority who does not need its object. BURSEVI: Heedlessness sickens the heart and prevents it from tasting faith; as fever makes sugar taste bitter, heedlessness is lethal poison to hearts. ALUSI-FULL: Descent may be spatial, if the wilderness is higher than the town, or a descent in rank; the contextual sense is the latter. ALUSI-FULL: The explanation that the exchange takes place in the stomach is dismissed. IBNASHUR-FULL: The second complement can also take من with the sense of the exchange باء, as in the construction cited with the verse."}, {"id": "2:61/q29/p3", "position": "Freedom is better than Egyptian captivity", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: The better food means manna and quails, superior in pleasure, benefit, and freedom from the need to work for food. ALUSI-FULL: The better food is manna and quails; its superiority lies in greater value, taste, benefit, ease of acquisition, and freedom from doubt about its lawfulness."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
