<<chunk 18, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:61/q30", "question": "What does adnā mean or derive from?", "turns_on": "Derivation from nearness, hamzated baseness, or dūn.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q30/p1", "position": "Lower or less valuable", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari defines substitution as leaving one thing for another and glosses adnā as lower, meaner, and less valuable. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari glosses adnā as lower, meaner, and less valuable, connecting it with d-n-ʾ words for low or base things. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid glosses adnā as more inferior or worse. ZAJJAJ: The unhamzated reading “adnā” is preferred in transmission and means nearer or lower in value; the hamzated “adnaʾ” is also possible and denotes something base or vile. NAHHAS: Deriving أدنى from دنيء is allowable only in poetry, not prose, and so cannot explain the Qurʾānic wording. THALABI: Adnā means lower, baser, and worse; khayr means nobler and better, so the rebuke asks why they exchange good for evil. WAHIDI-BASIT: Another reading takes adna as nearer in value, meaning of lesser worth, or as less tasty and pleasurable than what was better. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra also derives adna from baseness, with Zuhayr al-Farqabi reportedly reading it adna'a with hamza. WAHIDI-BASIT (بعض النحويين): Some grammarians explain adna as adwan, meaning lower or meaner, by swapping n and w; the author rejects this because dun meaning inferior does not yield a verb. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Adnā” means lower, baser, or worse. KASHSHAF-FULL: Adnā means lower in rank and smaller in value; nearness and distance can metaphorically indicate low and high worth. KASHSHAF-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabī reads adnaʾ with hamza, deriving it from meanness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (علي بن سليمان): Ali ibn Sulayman derives أدنى, with eased hamza, from danīʾ, meaning plainly base or inferior. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Istibdāl means seeking to put one thing in another's place; al-Zajjaj derives أدنى from nearness in value. TABRISI (الفراء): Al-Farra prefers deriving adnā from baseness, with hamza omitted. TABRISI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd distinguishes al-danī without hamza, meaning vile, from al-danīʾ with hamza, meaning lewd. TABRISI: Adnā can mean nearer or lower, as in something close or inferior. TABRISI: Another reading of adnā is the lower-priced choice in place of the more valuable, tasty one. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Adnā can mean lower or inferior. RAZI-FULL: Adnā does not mean inferior in religious benefit, since God granted the request; it refers to worldly benefit. RAZI-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabi reads adnaʾ with hamza, from the word for baseness. QURTUBI-FULL (علي بن سليمان): ʿAlī b. Sulaymān derives adnā from the base dāniʾ, low or vile, with the hamzah softened. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Another derivation takes adnā from dūn, inferior: its form began as adwan, underwent metathesis, and changed final wāw to alif. BAYDAWI-FULL: Adnā means nearer in rank and lower in worth; spatial nearness is metaphorically used for baseness and distance for honor. BAYDAWI-FULL: A reading has adnaʾ, derived from lowliness. NASAFI-FULL: Adna means lower in rank and lesser in value, while what is better is higher and nobler. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): ʿAlī ibn Sulaymān al-Akhfash derives adnā from danāʾa, baseness or poor quality, with hamza lightened to alif. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (غيره): Another grammarian derives adnā from dūn, ‘lower in rank,’ as a transformed form of adwan, like awlā from wayl. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: On the Basran analysis, هو أدنى is the relative clause and أدنى its predicate; the comparison phrase من ذلك الطعام الواحد is omitted because the comparative is predicative and its counterpart follows. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If أدنى arose by metathesis from أدون, both forms mean lowliness and make a better contrast with خير; if it means nearer, its opposite is farther. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari chooses the value reading, glossing أدنى as lower in rank and less in worth; nearness can figuratively mean small value. SAMIN-DURR (أبو إسحاق الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says أدنى derives from دنو, nearness; it can be lower in value and baseness, or nearer to them in this world, while the better food brings afterlife benefit through patience. SAMIN-DURR (علي بن سليمان الأخفش): Al-Akhfash derives أدنى from أدنأ, the lowly or base thing, with hamza softened; the poem is cited as a witness. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): A third etymology takes أدنى from أدون, the bad or inferior thing; the middle radical is moved after the final radical, producing أَدْنَو, then undergoes weak-letter change, on pattern أفلع. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid glosses adna as worse or inferior. BURSEVI: The rebuke asks whether they are choosing the lower thing for themselves in exchange for what is better; “adnā” is lower in rank and worth. ALUSI-FULL: أدنى may derive from nearness or be inverted from دون, meaning inferior; on the first derivation, nearness is metaphorically used for low worth, as distance is used for honor."}, {"id": "2:61/q30/p2", "position": "From hamzated baseness", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: The unhamzated reading “adnā” is preferred in transmission and means nearer or lower in value; the hamzated “adnaʾ” is also possible and denotes something base or vile. NAHHAS (علي بن سليمان): He says أدنى can only derive from hamzated دنيء, with hamza substituted. Against — NAHHAS: Deriving أدنى from دنيء is allowable only in poetry, not prose, and so cannot explain the Qurʾānic wording. THALABI (الفراء عن زهير العرقي): Zuhayr al-ʿAriqī is reported to read adnāʾ with hamza; the common reading omits hamza. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra also derives adna from baseness, with Zuhayr al-Farqabi reportedly reading it adna'a with hamza. KASHSHAF-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabī reads adnaʾ with hamza, deriving it from meanness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (علي بن سليمان): Ali ibn Sulayman derives أدنى, with eased hamza, from danīʾ, meaning plainly base or inferior. TABRISI (الفراء): Al-Farra prefers deriving adnā from baseness, with hamza omitted. TABRISI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd distinguishes al-danī without hamza, meaning vile, from al-danīʾ with hamza, meaning lewd. RAZI-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabi reads adnaʾ with hamza, from the word for baseness. QURTUBI-FULL (علي بن سليمان): ʿAlī b. Sulaymān derives adnā from the base dāniʾ, low or vile, with the hamzah softened. QURTUBI-FULL: A noncanonical reading is adnaʾ, with hamzah. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): ʿAlī ibn Sulaymān al-Akhfash derives adnā from danāʾa, baseness or poor quality, with hamza lightened to alif. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو زيد): Abū Zayd records the hamzated forms danuʾa/yadnaʾu and danāʾa/danāʾ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabi, also called Zuhayr al-Kisa'i, reads أدنأ with hamza. SAMIN-DURR (علي بن سليمان الأخفش): Al-Akhfash derives أدنى from أدنأ, the lowly or base thing, with hamza softened; the poem is cited as a witness. SAMIN-DURR: The poem fragment is cited with al-Akhfash's proposal that أدنى originated as أدنأ with hamza and underwent hamza easing. SAMIN-DURR (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Firqabi reads أدنأ with hamza, supporting the derivation from دنأ and dناءة. ALUSI-FULL (زهير والكسائي): Zuhayr and al-Kisaʾi read أدنا with hamza, supporting derivation from الدناءة with hamza changed into alif."}, {"id": "2:61/q30/p3", "position": "Nearer or readily available", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (بعضهم): Some interpret adnā as nearer, deriving it from d-n-w, nearness. ZAJJAJ: The unhamzated reading “adnā” is preferred in transmission and means nearer or lower in value; the hamzated “adnaʾ” is also possible and denotes something base or vile. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers adna from nearness: the people would exchange a readily available, ordinary food for the noble provision specially granted them over others. WAHIDI-BASIT: Another reading takes adna as nearer in value, meaning of lesser worth, or as less tasty and pleasurable than what was better. KASHSHAF-FULL: Adnā means lower in rank and smaller in value; nearness and distance can metaphorically indicate low and high worth. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Istibdāl means seeking to put one thing in another's place; al-Zajjaj derives أدنى from nearness in value. TABRISI: Adnā can mean nearer or lower, as in something close or inferior. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj derives adnā from d-n-w, closeness in value: a comparable garment is cheap. BAYDAWI-FULL: Adnā means nearer in rank and lower in worth; spatial nearness is metaphorically used for baseness and distance for honor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Adnā may be the elative of dunūw, ‘nearness,’ from danā/yadnū. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If أدنى arose by metathesis from أدون, both forms mean lowliness and make a better contrast with خير; if it means nearer, its opposite is farther. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari chooses the value reading, glossing أدنى as lower in rank and less in worth; nearness can figuratively mean small value. SAMIN-DURR (أبو إسحاق الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says أدنى derives from دنو, nearness; it can be lower in value and baseness, or nearer to them in this world, while the better food brings afterlife benefit through patience. ALUSI-FULL: أدنى may derive from nearness or be inverted from دون, meaning inferior; on the first derivation, nearness is metaphorically used for low worth, as distance is used for honor."}, {"id": "2:61/q30/p4", "position": "The comparative denotes an inferior choice", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (الكسائي): Al-Kisa'i says eloquent Arabs freely decline words normally treated as indeclinable, including in poetry; only comparatives on af'al are never heard declined. IBNATIYYA-FULL (زهير للكسائي): Zuhayr reports al-Kisaʾi's reading أدنأ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The omitted comparison after خير is منه, referring back to الذي هو أدنى; both relative clauses are nominal to express unbounded states, while the verbal clause مما تنبت suits recurring growth. SAMIN-DURR: أدنى is the predicate of هو, while هو خير is likewise a relative clause with a resumptive element. BURHAN: When context supplies t
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
