<<chunk 18, part 2 of 0..5>>
 to replace the implied people associated with Ḥimyar."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q35", "question": "Which place does miṣr denote here?", "turns_on": "Tanwīn and proper-name grammar, the Holy Land command, and reports of later settlement.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q35/p1", "position": "An unspecified settled town or city", "reasons": "AKHFASH (بعضهم): Some distinguish the two occurrences: مصر in Joseph is the named Egypt, while مصر here means any city among cities. TAB-FULL: Most reciters pronounce miṣran with tanwīn; on this reading it means any town, since the requested crops are found in settled places rather than wilderness. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada takes miṣran to mean one of the cities or towns. TAB-FULL (من قال إنها مصرا من الأمصار): Proponents of the generic-city reading argue that the Israelites were settled in Syria after leaving Egypt; the holy land was assigned to them, and their descendants entered it under Joshua after the forty years of wandering, with no text saying they returned to Egypt. ZAJJAJ: Most readers include final alif in “miṣran”; it can mean any town, appropriate to their wilderness setting, or Egypt as a masculine proper name and is then declinable. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says “a town” means any one of the cities; al-Suddi, Qatada, and al-Rabi' agree. NAHHAS: مصرا is best read as indefinite, matching the written alif; taking مصر as a proper name is possible but less apt because it is called a town, not a land or country. THALABI (قتادة): Miṣr means any one of the cities: had the verse meant the particular Egypt, it would be uninflected, as in the command to enter Egypt in Joseph’s story. MAWARDI-FULL (قتادة): Qatada, al-Suddi, Mujahid, and Ibn Zayd say miṣran means any city, since the requested produce is available only in towns. WAHIDI-BASIT: With tanwin, Misran can mean any city, since the requested produce was available in towns and cities. JISHUMI (قراءة العامة): The common tanwīn on miṣran means any city; al-Ḥasan omits tanwīn to mean Egypt specifically, and Ibn Masʿūd’s codex lacks alif and tanwīn. JISHUMI (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد وأبو علي): Miṣran may mean any city; Abū ʿAlī argues it cannot mean Egypt because they were told to enter Jerusalem. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak identifies the city as the Egypt of Moses and Pharaoh; al-Baghawi prefers the generic meaning because the proper name Egypt would not take tanwīn. KASHSHAF-FULL: If it means the country, it has only one of the two causes of indeclinability; if it means any city, it is indefinite, while Abdullah's codex and al-Aʿmash read the city name without tanwin. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد وغيره ممن صرفها): Mujahid and others who inflect مصر take it as an unspecified town, citing the command to enter a town and reports that the Israelites settled Syria after the wilderness. TABRISI: All canonical readers give Miṣr tanwīn, taking it as an unspecified city since the Israelites were in the wilderness; it may instead mean Egypt proper, a masculine name. TABRISI (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد): Qatada, al-Suddi, and Mujahid take miṣr as any city: the requested crops are found in towns, not in the wilderness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن مسعود، ابن عباس، قتادة، ابن زيد): One view takes miṣran as any unspecified Egyptian city, since the requested produce was available in towns. RAZI-FULL (مفسرون): Among those accepting tanwin, some take Egypt to mean Pharaoh's country, while others understand it as any town where the requested foods could be found. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم الأصفهاني): Abu Muslim allows Pharaoh's Egypt: without tanwin, Miṣr must be a proper name and that is the only city with this name; with tanwin, it could remain a proper name or mean any city, allowing a choice among cities. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid and others take tanwīn miṣran as an indefinite town among the towns. QURTUBI-FULL: The indefinite-town view cites the apparent order to enter a town and reports that they lived in Syria after the wandering; the Egypt view cites their inheritance of Pharaoh's lands. NASAFI-FULL: Misr may mean any city, to which they descend from the wilderness, located between Jerusalem and Qinnasrin; the wilderness is twelve by eight farsakhs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد وابن زيد): With tanwin, مصر can mean any unspecified city, supported by the command to enter a town, later settlement in Syria, and the need for cities to obtain the foods requested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): An indefinite مصر may refer specifically to Pharaoh's Egypt, using an indefinite noun for a known person or place, as in asking for a man while meaning Zayd. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن بن بحر): Hasan ibn Bahr says مصر means Jerusalem: although indefinite in form, it refers to a specific place. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض الناس): Some reject Pharaoh's Egypt because the Israelites left it, refused to fight the giants in the Holy Land, wandered for forty years and died, while their descendants entered Syria and later returned to Jerusalem; no exegete or historian says the wanderers went to Egypt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He summarizes four tanwin interpretations: an unspecified city anywhere, an unspecified Syrian city, Jerusalem as a specific place, or Pharaoh's Egypt. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas interprets Miṣran as any one of the cities, as transmitted by Ibn Abi Hatim through Ikrima. IBNKATHIR-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi, Qatada, and al-Rabi ibn Anas are reported to give the same interpretation as Ibn Abbas: a city among cities. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Ibn Kathir rejects Ibn Jarir's hesitation and prefers a generic city, as reported from Ibn Abbas and others. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada likewise takes misran to mean a city among cities. BURSEVI: Miṣr can mean a great town; its name is linked to cutting off open space through building, and it can be used for a town or village. It is indefinite here, so it declines. BURSEVI: Miṣr means any town, not Pharaoh’s Egypt: the Israelites had been commanded to enter the Holy Land, so Egypt would not fit. ELMALILI (ekser-i müfessirîn): Most commentators take Misr as a common noun meaning a town, specifically one of the towns in the Holy Land, since Israel did not return to Egypt after leaving it."}, {"id": "2:61/q35/p2", "position": "Pharaoh's Egypt", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (بعض من قرأ بالإجراء والتنوين): Al-Tabari allows that a reader who adds tanwīn might still intend the proper name Egypt, following the written form of the codex. TAB-FULL (الذي لم ينون مصر): The reading without tanwīn and the alif clearly means the specific, well-known Egypt. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says it means a city, and reports that the Israelites did not return to Egypt. TAB-FULL (آخرون): Other commentators say the command means the Egypt where Pharaoh lived. TAB-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya identifies miṣran with Pharaoh's Egypt. TAB-FULL (أبي بن كعب وعبد الله بن مسعود): The pro-Egypt argument also cites Ubayy ibn Kaʿb's and Ibn Masʿud's reading without an alif, which they take to mean Egypt itself. IBNABIHATIM (أبو العالية): Al-Aliyah interprets the destination as Pharaoh's Egypt. IBNABIHATIM (الأعمش): Al-A'mash identifies it as Egypt, then governed by Salih ibn Ali. THALABI (الأعمش): Miṣr means the Egypt ruled by Ṣāliḥ b. ʿAlī; the uninflected reading of al-Ḥasan and Ṭalḥa and the codices of ʿAbd Allāh and Ubayy support its being a proper name, though inflected for shortness. THALABI (الضحاك): Miṣr means the Egypt of Moses and Pharaoh. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan, Abu al-ʿAliya, and al-Rabi say the verse means the specific Egypt from which the Israelites left, Pharaoh's Egypt. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak identifies the city as the Egypt of Moses and Pharaoh; al-Baghawi prefers the generic meaning because the proper name Egypt would not take tanwīn. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة ممن صرفها): Some who inflect مصر still identify it as Pharaoh's Egypt, citing the Quran's account that Israel inherited Pharaoh's lands and traces; they allow its inflection. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وأبان بن تغلب وغيرهما): Al-Hasan, Aban ibn Taghlib, and others read مصر without inflection, as does Ubayy's codex, and mean Pharaoh's Egypt. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash identifies it as the Egypt over which Salih ibn Ali presides. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أشهب): Ashhab reports Malik's view that it is Malik's own Egypt, the town where Pharaoh resided. TABRISI (الحسن والربيع): Al-Hasan and al-Rabiʿ say the requested Egypt is Pharaoh's Egypt from which the Israelites departed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو صالح عن ابن عباس، أبو العالية، الضحاك): A second view identifies Miṣr as the specific land of Egypt, Pharaoh’s Egypt according to Ibn Abbas. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ prefers the specific Egypt interpretation and cites the non-tanwīn reading of Miṣr as evidence. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الأعمش): When asked about the reading, al-Aʿmash said it means the Egypt ruled by Ṣāliḥ ibn ʿAlī. RAZI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the final alif in miṣran was added by a scribe, making the word definite and referring specifically to Pharaoh's Egypt; this is also transmitted from Abu al-ʿAliya and al-Rabiʿ. RAZI-FULL (مفسرون): Among those accepting tanwin, some take Egypt to mean Pharaoh's country, while others understand it as any town where the requested foods could be found. RAZI-FULL (كثير من المفسرين): Many commentators deny that Miṣr means Pharaoh's Egypt, citing the command to enter the Holy Land, the grant of that land, the ban on turning back, and the forty-year exclusion before entry. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم الأصفهاني): Abu Muslim allows Pharaoh's Egypt: without tanwin, Miṣr must be a proper name and that is the only city with this name; with tanwin, it could remain a proper name or mean any city, allowing a choice among cities. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وأبان بن تغلب وطلحة): Al-Ḥasan, Abān b. Taghlib, and Ṭalḥah read Miṣr without tanwīn; the Ubayy codex and Ibn Masʿūd likewise identify Pharaoh's Egypt. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): Mālik told Ashhab that this is Egypt, his own town and Pharaoh's residence, as quoted by Ibn ʿAṭiyyah. QURTUBI-FULL (طائفة ممن
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
