<<chunk 18, part 5 of 0..5>>
 name because it is light like هند; Nahhas rejects this under the rules of Khalil, Sibawayh, and Farraʾ. NAHHAS: The argument is wrong: a woman named زيد would remain diptote under Khalil, Sibawayh, and Farraʾ; the claim that Arabs freely decline all diptotes is also rejected. WAHIDI-BASIT: Misr may instead mean Egypt specifically; it could then take declension because the name is light and short. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد وغيره ممن صرفها): Mujahid and others who inflect مصر take it as an unspecified town, citing the command to enter a town and reports that the Israelites settled Syria after the wilderness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة ممن صرفها): Some who inflect مصر still identify it as Pharaoh's Egypt, citing the Quran's account that Israel inherited Pharaoh's lands and traces; they allow its inflection. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وأبان بن تغلب وغيرهما): Al-Hasan, Aban ibn Taghlib, and others read مصر without inflection, as does Ubayy's codex, and mean Pharaoh's Egypt. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الأعمش): When asked about the reading, al-Aʿmash said it means the Egypt ruled by Ṣāliḥ ibn ʿAlī. RAZI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the final alif in miṣran was added by a scribe, making the word definite and referring specifically to Pharaoh's Egypt; this is also transmitted from Abu al-ʿAliya and al-Rabiʿ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Abu Hayyan says foreignness only blocks declension in names longer than three letters, so a three-letter name with a still middle consonant is declined. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The proposed diptote form rests on analogy to a disputed case and conflicts with Arabic usage, so it must be discarded. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): They may instead have been sent to Egypt itself, which is declinable because its middle consonant is silent and the name is light like هند and دعد; a poem illustrates the forms, or the declension may reflect treating it as a place name. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبي بن كعب): The readings of Ubayy ibn Kab and Ibn Masud have Miṣr without declension. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliyah and al-Rabi ibn Anas explain the non-declined reading as Egypt of Pharaoh; Ibn Abi Hatim also transmits this from al-Aliyah and al-Aʿmash. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir allows Egypt of Pharaoh even with declension, treating the spelling as following the codex, like 76:15–16, but leaves the intended place unresolved. BURHAN (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni notes that grammatical inflection can differ from the meaning; the future-subjunctive أن in “that he says” does not make the condemnatory question’s event future in sense. BURSEVI (قيل): An alternative identifies Miṣr as Pharaoh’s Egypt; its declension is explained by its medial still consonant, or by construing it as “country” rather than “city.” IBNASHUR-FULL (الفخر): Al-Fakhr's reading treats ‘go down to Egypt, and you will have what you asked’ as God's answer and therefore a favor, even though it is conditional on entering a town. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عطاء الله): Ibn ʿAṭāʾ Allāh warns that a seeker may misread delayed punishment as approval; God may quietly withdraw spiritual provision or leave the seeker to personal desires, placing the person at a distance without awareness."}, {"id": "2:61/q36/p4", "position": "A proper name can be declined", "reasons": "AKHFASH: Feminine names such as هند and جمل may be declined or left without declension, depending on Arab usage. ZAJJAJ: Most readers include final alif in “miṣran”; it can mean any town, appropriate to their wilderness setting, or Egypt as a masculine proper name and is then declinable. ZAJJAJ: A reading without alif can refer to Egypt: the place name is treated as masculine but named after a feminine city, so it is indeclinable, as in the cited verse. Against — NAHHAS: The argument is wrong: a woman named زيد would remain diptote under Khalil, Sibawayh, and Farraʾ; the claim that Arabs freely decline all diptotes is also rejected. THALABI (الأعمش): Miṣr means the Egypt ruled by Ṣāliḥ b. ʿAlī; the uninflected reading of al-Ḥasan and Ṭalḥa and the codices of ʿAbd Allāh and Ubayy support its being a proper name, though inflected for shortness. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra prefers leaving Misr undeclined; unlike common feminine names of three letters with a still middle letter, a place-name is rarely used as a personal name, and its written alif marks pause. KASHSHAF-FULL: Miṣran may be the proper name of Egypt; it is declined despite properness and femininity because its middle consonant is quiescent, like Noah and Lot. TABRISI: All canonical readers give Miṣr tanwīn, taking it as an unspecified city since the Israelites were in the wilderness; it may instead mean Egypt proper, a masculine name. TABRISI (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud is reported to read Miṣr without the alif; it may mean Egypt proper as in Yusuf 12:99, whose name is masculine despite denoting a city, or reflect the written muṣḥaf. RAZI-FULL: The well-known reading gives Miṣran tanwin despite the two factors of definiteness and feminine gender because its middle consonant is quiescent, as with Nuh and Lut; if common noun, it has only one factor. NASAFI-FULL: Alternatively, Misr means Pharaoh's Egypt; it is declined despite feminine and proper-name features because it means a town or has a quiescent middle consonant, like Noah and Lot. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (المعربون والمفسرون): Some grammarians and exegetes allow the tanned مصر to be a proper name, explaining its declension by its lightness or by treating it as a place noun. ELMALILI: Misr may be a proper name or a common noun; as a proper name it is indeclinable, though declension is permitted because it has three letters and a quiescent middle letter. IBNASHUR-FULL: If مصر means the country, it may be diptote as a feminine place-name or triptote as a place-name or a feminine three-letter name with a still middle consonant."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
