<<chunk 18, part 4 of 0..5>>
obtain the crops they requested; it could have been Egypt or Syria. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir allows Egypt of Pharaoh even with declension, treating the spelling as following the codex, like 76:15–16, but leaves the intended place unresolved."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q36", "question": "How is miṣr read and inflected?", "turns_on": "Written alif and majority recitation versus non-tanwīn codices and proper-name grammar.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q36/p1", "position": "Alif and tanwīn", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Most reciters pronounce miṣran with tanwīn; on this reading it means any town, since the requested crops are found in settled places rather than wilderness. TAB-FULL (بعض من قرأ بالإجراء والتنوين): Al-Tabari allows that a reader who adds tanwīn might still intend the proper name Egypt, following the written form of the codex. TAB-FULL (الذي لم ينون مصر): The reading without tanwīn and the alif clearly means the specific, well-known Egypt. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari accepts the reading with alif and tanwīn because it agrees with Muslim codices and the widespread recitation; he rejects the opposing reading as non-authoritative. NAHHAS: مصرا is best read as indefinite, matching the written alif; taking مصر as a proper name is possible but less apt because it is called a town, not a land or country. MAWARDI-FULL: Most reciters read miṣran with tanwīn; some read it without tanwīn, and Ibn Masud's reading omits the alif. WAHIDI-BASIT: With tanwin, Misran can mean any city, since the requested produce was available in towns and cities. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra prefers leaving Misr undeclined; unlike common feminine names of three letters with a still middle letter, a place-name is rarely used as a personal name, and its written alif marks pause. JISHUMI (قراءة العامة): The common tanwīn on miṣran means any city; al-Ḥasan omits tanwīn to mean Egypt specifically, and Ibn Masʿūd’s codex lacks alif and tanwīn. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak identifies the city as the Egypt of Moses and Pharaoh; al-Baghawi prefers the generic meaning because the proper name Egypt would not take tanwīn. KASHSHAF-FULL: If it means the country, it has only one of the two causes of indeclinability; if it means any city, it is indefinite, while Abdullah's codex and al-Aʿmash read the city name without tanwin. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Most readers inflect مصر with tanwin, in agreement with the codex, though some Uthmani codices are reported otherwise. TABRISI: All canonical readers give Miṣr tanwīn, taking it as an unspecified city since the Israelites were in the wilderness; it may instead mean Egypt proper, a masculine name. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ prefers the specific Egypt interpretation and cites the non-tanwīn reading of Miṣr as evidence. RAZI-FULL: The well-known reading gives Miṣran tanwin despite the two factors of definiteness and feminine gender because its middle consonant is quiescent, as with Nuh and Lut; if common noun, it has only one factor. RAZI-FULL (عبد الله): The codex of ʿAbd Allah and al-Aʿmash's reading have Miṣr without tanwin. RAZI-FULL (مفسرون): Among those accepting tanwin, some take Egypt to mean Pharaoh's country, while others understand it as any town where the requested foods could be found. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم الأصفهاني): Abu Muslim allows Pharaoh's Egypt: without tanwin, Miṣr must be a proper name and that is the only city with this name; with tanwin, it could remain a proper name or mean any city, allowing a choice among cities. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وأبان بن تغلب وطلحة): Al-Ḥasan, Abān b. Taghlib, and Ṭalḥah read Miṣr without tanwīn; the Ubayy codex and Ibn Masʿūd likewise identify Pharaoh's Egypt. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid and others take tanwīn miṣran as an indefinite town among the towns. QURTUBI-FULL (طائفة ممن صرفها): Other grammarians who read the word with tanwīn still identify it as Egypt itself. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش والكسائي): Al-Akhfash and al-Kisāʾī permit tanwīn because the name is light like Hind and Daʿd, citing a poem that uses both case forms. QURTUBI-FULL (سيبويه والخليل والفراء): Sībawayh, al-Khalīl, and al-Farrāʾ reject that declension, reasoning that Zayd would not take tanwīn as a woman's name. QURTUBI-FULL (غير الأخفش): Another grammarian explains the tanwīn by saying the word means a place, making it declinable. BAYDAWI-FULL (قيل): A reported interpretation takes Miṣr as Egypt; its treatment as a proper name is supported by nonnunation in Ibn Masʿūd's codex. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن وطلحة والأعمش وأبان بن تغلب): They read مصر without tanwin, as also written in the codices of Ubayy, Ibn Masud, and some Uthmanic copies; most readers give it tanwin. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد وابن زيد): With tanwin, مصر can mean any unspecified city, supported by the command to enter a town, later settlement in Syria, and the need for cities to obtain the foods requested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عيسى بن عمر): Isa ibn Umar allowed مصر to be diptote by analogy with Hind, but this is unattested from Arabs except in the declined form, so the author rejects the analogy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The un-tanwined reading مصر means the proper name of Pharaoh's land. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He summarizes four tanwin interpretations: an unspecified city anywhere, an unspecified Syrian city, Jerusalem as a specific place, or Pharaoh's Egypt. SAMIN-DURR (قرأ الجمهور): The majority read مصر with nunation, matching the written muṣḥaf; one explanation is that they were sent to any Egyptian city, so the word is declinable. SAMIN-DURR (الحسن وغيره): Al-Hasan and others read مصر without nunation; the same form occurs in some Uthman and Ubayy codices, as if a particular place were intended. SAMIN-DURR: The majority unanimously prevent declension for مصر in يوسف 12:99. IBNKATHIR-FULL: The written and majority reading is Miṣran, declined with tanwin and written with an alif in the Uthmanic codices. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir refuses a reading without declension because the codices unanimously use the declined form. DURR-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash read misra without nunation and identified it as Egypt governed by Salih b. Ali. ALUSI-FULL: The claim that مصر is a proper name is supported by Ibn Masʿud's codex spelling it without alif after ra, but opposed by the Qur'anic tanwin and by the command to enter the holy land, understood as Syria, which implies they were confined to the wilderness. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya notes مصر without nunation in Ibn Masʿūd’s reading and without alif in Ubayy’s codex and some ʿUthmānic codices."}, {"id": "2:61/q36/p2", "position": "No tanwīn or final alif", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الذي لم ينون مصر): The reading without tanwīn and the alif clearly means the specific, well-known Egypt. ZAJJAJ: A reading without alif can refer to Egypt: the place name is treated as masculine but named after a feminine city, so it is indeclinable, as in the cited verse. THALABI (الأعمش): Miṣr means the Egypt ruled by Ṣāliḥ b. ʿAlī; the uninflected reading of al-Ḥasan and Ṭalḥa and the codices of ʿAbd Allāh and Ubayy support its being a proper name, though inflected for shortness. THALABI (قتادة): Miṣr means any one of the cities: had the verse meant the particular Egypt, it would be uninflected, as in the command to enter Egypt in Joseph’s story. MAWARDI-FULL: Most reciters read miṣran with tanwīn; some read it without tanwīn, and Ibn Masud's reading omits the alif. WAHIDI-BASIT: The noninflected reading is described as rare; the author favors inflection because the name is light and short. JISHUMI (قراءة العامة): The common tanwīn on miṣran means any city; al-Ḥasan omits tanwīn to mean Egypt specifically, and Ibn Masʿūd’s codex lacks alif and tanwīn. KASHSHAF-FULL: If it means the country, it has only one of the two causes of indeclinability; if it means any city, it is indefinite, while Abdullah's codex and al-Aʿmash read the city name without tanwin. RAZI-FULL (عبد الله): The codex of ʿAbd Allah and al-Aʿmash's reading have Miṣr without tanwin. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم الأصفهاني): Abu Muslim allows Pharaoh's Egypt: without tanwin, Miṣr must be a proper name and that is the only city with this name; with tanwin, it could remain a proper name or mean any city, allowing a choice among cities. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وأبان بن تغلب وطلحة): Al-Ḥasan, Abān b. Taghlib, and Ṭalḥah read Miṣr without tanwīn; the Ubayy codex and Ibn Masʿūd likewise identify Pharaoh's Egypt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن وطلحة والأعمش وأبان بن تغلب): They read مصر without tanwin, as also written in the codices of Ubayy, Ibn Masud, and some Uthmanic copies; most readers give it tanwin. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The proposed diptote form rests on analogy to a disputed case and conflicts with Arabic usage, so it must be discarded. ALUSI-FULL: The claim that مصر is a proper name is supported by Ibn Masʿud's codex spelling it without alif after ra, but opposed by the Qur'anic tanwin and by the command to enter the holy land, understood as Syria, which implies they were confined to the wilderness. ELMALILI: Misr may be a proper name or a common noun; as a proper name it is indeclinable, though declension is permitted because it has three letters and a quiescent middle letter. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya notes مصر without nunation in Ibn Masʿūd’s reading and without alif in Ubayy’s codex and some ʿUthmānic codices."}, {"id": "2:61/q36/p3", "position": "The reading or inflection is disputed", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (من قال إنها مصرا من الأمصار): Proponents of the generic-city reading argue that the Israelites were settled in Syria after leaving Egypt; the holy land was assigned to them, and their descendants entered it under Joshua after the forty years of wandering, with no text saying they returned to Egypt. TAB-FULL (أبي بن كعب وعبد الله بن مسعود): The pro-Egypt argument also cites Ubayy ibn Kaʿb's and Ibn Masʿud's reading without an alif, which they take to mean Egypt itself. NAHHAS (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī allows declension of مصر even as a definite
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
