<<chunk 18, part 3 of 0..5>>
 صرفها): Other grammarians who read the word with tanwīn still identify it as Egypt itself. QURTUBI-FULL: The indefinite-town view cites the apparent order to enter a town and reports that they lived in Syria after the wandering; the Egypt view cites their inheritance of Pharaoh's lands. NASAFI-FULL: Alternatively, Misr means Pharaoh's Egypt; it is declined despite feminine and proper-name features because it means a town or has a quiescent middle consonant, like Noah and Lot. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): An indefinite مصر may refer specifically to Pharaoh's Egypt, using an indefinite noun for a known person or place, as in asking for a man while meaning Zayd. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مالك): Malik identified the place as Egypt, the speaker's town where Pharaoh lived, in a report transmitted by Ashhab. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The un-tanwined reading مصر means the proper name of Pharaoh's land. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He summarizes four tanwin interpretations: an unspecified city anywhere, an unspecified Syrian city, Jerusalem as a specific place, or Pharaoh's Egypt. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): They may instead have been sent to Egypt itself, which is declinable because its middle consonant is silent and the name is light like هند and دعد; a poem illustrates the forms, or the declension may reflect treating it as a place name. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliyah and al-Rabi ibn Anas explain the non-declined reading as Egypt of Pharaoh; Ibn Abi Hatim also transmits this from al-Aliyah and al-Aʿmash. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir allows Egypt of Pharaoh even with declension, treating the spelling as following the codex, like 76:15–16, but leaves the intended place unresolved. DURR-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya interprets the place as Pharaoh's Egypt. BURSEVI (قيل): An alternative identifies Miṣr as Pharaoh’s Egypt; its declension is explained by its medial still consonant, or by construing it as “country” rather than “city.” BURSEVI: Miṣr means any town, not Pharaoh’s Egypt: the Israelites had been commanded to enter the Holy Land, so Egypt would not fit. ALUSI-FULL (أشهب عن مالك): Ashhab relates that Malik identified the place as Egypt, his town, where Pharaoh lived, making مصر a proper name. ELMALILI (ekser-i müfessirîn): Most commentators take Misr as a common noun meaning a town, specifically one of the towns in the Holy Land, since Israel did not return to Egypt after leaving it. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): Ashhab reports Mālik’s view that مصر here means their own town, the dwelling place of Pharaoh. STUDYQURAN (Ṭ): The orthography requires miṣran rather than miṣra and therefore excludes Egypt itself; some early commentators nevertheless understood it as Pharaoh's miṣr."}, {"id": "2:61/q35/p3", "position": "The destination remains open", "reasons": "AKHFASH (بعض الناس): Some claimed that مصر in both this verse and the Joseph passage means the specific country of Egypt. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari says the requested produce is found in settled towns and villages, so they must leave the wilderness for a place where it grows. ZAJJAJ: A reading without alif can refer to Egypt: the place name is treated as masculine but named after a feminine city, so it is indeclinable, as in the cited verse. WAHIDI-BASIT: The command to descend to Misr may be spoken by Moses, or by God after an omitted prayer and response. WAHIDI-BASIT: Misr may instead mean Egypt specifically; it could then take declension because the name is light and short. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Their requested produce is available only in towns and cities. JISHUMI (أبو مسلم): Abū Muslim says the command does not entail entry into Egypt. KASHSHAF-FULL: Miṣran may be the proper name of Egypt; it is declined despite properness and femininity because its middle consonant is quiescent, like Noah and Lot. TABRISI (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud is reported to read Miṣr without the alif; it may mean Egypt proper as in Yusuf 12:99, whose name is masculine despite denoting a city, or reflect the written muṣḥaf. BAYDAWI-FULL: Ihbiṭū miṣran means descend from the wilderness to it; the verb describes entering a valley or leaving a higher place. BAYDAWI-FULL (قيل): A reported interpretation takes Miṣr as Egypt; its treatment as a proper name is supported by nonnunation in Ibn Masʿūd's codex. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari compares مصر, when treated as a proper name, to Nuh and Lut, which are declined despite foreignness because they are short with a still middle consonant. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: هبطوا مصرا can mean settle in a city; هبط منه means leave it, as though a person arriving in a town descends upon it. SAMIN-DURR (قرأ الجمهور): The majority read مصر with nunation, matching the written muṣḥaf; one explanation is that they were sent to any Egyptian city, so the word is declinable. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says the name is an Arabicized Persian form of مصرائيم; if it names a specific place, its foreignness means it should be indeclinable, like ماه and جور and حمص. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines a miṣr as a substantial town where people coordinate worldly affairs and which gathers the kinds of goods Israel requested; smaller places do not have all of them. DURR-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash read misra without nunation and identified it as Egypt governed by Salih b. Ali. ELMALILI: Their request reflects a desire for civilized life, but it rests on a petty craving rather than a lofty purpose and betrays longing for their former Egyptian degradation and slavery, showing failure to value freedom. ELMALILI: One interpretation takes Misr as Egypt, making the command simply a reproach; the author notes that the same reproachful implication remains under the town interpretation. IBNASHUR-FULL (الفخر): Al-Fakhr's reading treats ‘go down to Egypt, and you will have what you asked’ as God's answer and therefore a favor, even though it is conditional on entering a town. IBNASHUR-FULL: اهبطوا is permission colored by rebuke: if this is what they want, they may descend to any Egyptian town, though no nearby town was then reachable. IBNASHUR-FULL (قيل): An alternative reads مصر as Egypt, the country they left; the impossible command to return is pure reproach and a threat recalling their old hardship. IBNASHUR-FULL: If مصر means the country, it may be diptote as a feminine place-name or triptote as a place-name or a feminine three-letter name with a still middle consonant. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Despite their Abrahamic religious and moral heritage, Israelites were degraded by centuries in Egypt and its idolatrous culture, settling for comfort and becoming fearful. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: They longed for ordinary Egyptian life and vegetables, though manna, quail, and twelve springs were extraordinary divine gifts of special value; Moses rebuked their preference for the inferior. STUDYQURAN: Miṣr can mean a town or city; as a proper name or foreign word, it means Egypt."}, {"id": "2:61/q35/p4", "position": "Jerusalem or a town in the Holy Land", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (من قال إنها مصرا من الأمصار): Proponents of the generic-city reading argue that the Israelites were settled in Syria after leaving Egypt; the holy land was assigned to them, and their descendants entered it under Joshua after the forty years of wandering, with no text saying they returned to Egypt. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari concludes that God gave them a settled, cultivated place where they could obtain the crops they requested; it could have been Egypt or Syria. JISHUMI (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد وأبو علي): Miṣran may mean any city; Abū ʿAlī argues it cannot mean Egypt because they were told to enter Jerusalem. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد وغيره ممن صرفها): Mujahid and others who inflect مصر take it as an unspecified town, citing the command to enter a town and reports that the Israelites settled Syria after the wilderness. TABRISI (أبو مسلم وابن زيد): Abu Muslim, with a report also attributed to Ibn Zayd, identifies Egypt as Jerusalem. RAZI-FULL (كثير من المفسرين): Many commentators deny that Miṣr means Pharaoh's Egypt, citing the command to enter the Holy Land, the grant of that land, the ban on turning back, and the forty-year exclusion before entry. QURTUBI-FULL: The indefinite-town view cites the apparent order to enter a town and reports that they lived in Syria after the wandering; the Egypt view cites their inheritance of Pharaoh's lands. NASAFI-FULL: Misr may mean any city, to which they descend from the wilderness, located between Jerusalem and Qinnasrin; the wilderness is twelve by eight farsakhs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة والسدي ومجاهد وابن زيد): With tanwin, مصر can mean any unspecified city, supported by the command to enter a town, later settlement in Syria, and the need for cities to obtain the foods requested. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن بن بحر): Hasan ibn Bahr says مصر means Jerusalem: although indefinite in form, it refers to a specific place. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: He summarizes four tanwin interpretations: an unspecified city anywhere, an unspecified Syrian city, Jerusalem as a specific place, or Pharaoh's Egypt. BURSEVI: Miṣr means any town, not Pharaoh’s Egypt: the Israelites had been commanded to enter the Holy Land, so Egypt would not fit. ALUSI-FULL: The claim that مصر is a proper name is supported by Ibn Masʿud's codex spelling it without alif after ra, but opposed by the Qur'anic tanwin and by the command to enter the holy land, understood as Syria, which implies they were confined to the wilderness. ELMALILI (ekser-i müfessirîn): Most commentators take Misr as a common noun meaning a town, specifically one of the towns in the Holy Land, since Israel did not return to Egypt after leaving it. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Moses reminded them of their national dignity and ordered them toward the holy land, but they refused to enter while its strong people remained and told Moses and God to fight without them."}, {"id": "2:61/q35/p5", "position": "The destination is not settled", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari concludes that God gave them a settled, cultivated place where they could 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
