<<chunk 18, part 1 of 0..5>>
he comparison, an elative used predicatively often omits the less-preferred object of comparison. ALUSI-FULL: The object is the thing they would obtain, while the noun with باء denotes what would be relinquished; أدنى qualifies the latter."}, {"id": "2:61/q30/p5", "position": "From dūn by metathesis", "reasons": "THALABI (some grammarians): Some grammarians derive adnā from adwan by moving the nūn and changing wāw to yāʾ, as in awlā min al-wayl. Against — WAHIDI-BASIT (بعض النحويين): Some grammarians explain adna as adwan, meaning lower or meaner, by swapping n and w; the author rejects this because dun meaning inferior does not yield a verb. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): Another derivation takes adnā from dūn, inferior: its form began as adwan, underwent metathesis, and changed final wāw to alif. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (غيره): Another grammarian derives adnā from dūn, ‘lower in rank,’ as a transformed form of adwan, like awlā from wayl. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If أدنى arose by metathesis from أدون, both forms mean lowliness and make a better contrast with خير; if it means nearer, its opposite is farther. SAMIN-DURR (قيل): A third etymology takes أدنى from أدون, the bad or inferior thing; the middle radical is moved after the final radical, producing أَدْنَو, then undergoes weak-letter change, on pattern أفلع."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q31", "question": "How is adnā read?", "turns_on": "The common unhamzated form versus reported hamzated adnaʾ.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q31/p1", "position": "Hamzated adnaʾ", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: The unhamzated reading “adnā” is preferred in transmission and means nearer or lower in value; the hamzated “adnaʾ” is also possible and denotes something base or vile. NAHHAS (علي بن سليمان): He says أدنى can only derive from hamzated دنيء, with hamza substituted. THALABI (الفراء عن زهير العرقي): Zuhayr al-ʿAriqī is reported to read adnāʾ with hamza; the common reading omits hamza. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farra also derives adna from baseness, with Zuhayr al-Farqabi reportedly reading it adna'a with hamza. KASHSHAF-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabī reads adnaʾ with hamza, deriving it from meanness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (علي بن سليمان): Ali ibn Sulayman derives أدنى, with eased hamza, from danīʾ, meaning plainly base or inferior. IBNATIYYA-FULL (زهير للكسائي): Zuhayr reports al-Kisaʾi's reading أدنأ. TABRISI (الفراء): Al-Farra prefers deriving adnā from baseness, with hamza omitted. TABRISI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd distinguishes al-danī without hamza, meaning vile, from al-danīʾ with hamza, meaning lewd. RAZI-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabi reads adnaʾ with hamza, from the word for baseness. QURTUBI-FULL (علي بن سليمان): ʿAlī b. Sulaymān derives adnā from the base dāniʾ, low or vile, with the hamzah softened. QURTUBI-FULL: A noncanonical reading is adnaʾ, with hamzah. BAYDAWI-FULL: A reading has adnaʾ, derived from lowliness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): ʿAlī ibn Sulaymān al-Akhfash derives adnā from danāʾa, baseness or poor quality, with hamza lightened to alif. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو زيد): Abū Zayd records the hamzated forms danuʾa/yadnaʾu and danāʾa/danāʾ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Farqabi, also called Zuhayr al-Kisa'i, reads أدنأ with hamza. SAMIN-DURR (علي بن سليمان الأخفش): Al-Akhfash derives أدنى from أدنأ, the lowly or base thing, with hamza softened; the poem is cited as a witness. SAMIN-DURR: The poem fragment is cited with al-Akhfash's proposal that أدنى originated as أدنأ with hamza and underwent hamza easing. SAMIN-DURR (زهير الفرقبي): Zuhayr al-Firqabi reads أدنأ with hamza, supporting the derivation from دنأ and dناءة. ALUSI-FULL (زهير والكسائي): Zuhayr and al-Kisaʾi read أدنا with hamza, supporting derivation from الدناءة with hamza changed into alif."}, {"id": "2:61/q31/p2", "position": "Unhamzated adnā", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: The unhamzated reading “adnā” is preferred in transmission and means nearer or lower in value; the hamzated “adnaʾ” is also possible and denotes something base or vile. THALABI (الفراء عن زهير العرقي): Zuhayr al-ʿAriqī is reported to read adnāʾ with hamza; the common reading omits hamza. TABRISI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd distinguishes al-danī without hamza, meaning vile, from al-danīʾ with hamza, meaning lewd."}, {"id": "2:61/q31/p3", "position": "A variant of adnā is reported", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Another reading takes adna as nearer in value, meaning of lesser worth, or as less tasty and pleasurable than what was better. TABRISI: Another reading of adnā is the lower-priced choice in place of the more valuable, tasty one. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari chooses the value reading, glossing أدنى as lower in rank and less in worth; nearness can figuratively mean small value."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q32", "question": "What does the command to descend mean?", "turns_on": "Literal settlement, loss of rank, or a reproachful command whose fulfillment is disputed.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q32/p1", "position": "Movement into a settlement", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL: “Go down to a city” means descend to one of the towns if they insist on these foods. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: This interpretation explains the order to descend to a city by the availability there of the requested foods. QURTUBI-FULL: The command to go down to a town was a challenge incapacitating them, as in the command to become stone or iron. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (غيره): Another account says they tired of manna and quail, were told to descend to a city, and first encountered Jericho. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The Israelites were then told to settle where their request could be met and descend to the source of the foods they wanted. BURSEVI: “Descend” means leave the wilderness if they want these foods. ELMALILI: Moses asks whether they would exchange a better blessing for an inferior thing and tells them to descend to a town, where they can obtain what they requested; this both fulfills the demand and exposes their poor choice and its outcome. STUDYQURAN: Habaṭa, “go down,” need not describe a change in elevation; English similarly uses “descend” for arriving at a place or moving into or out of a valley."}, {"id": "2:61/q32/p2", "position": "Reproach or impossible command", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: The command to go down to a town was a challenge incapacitating them, as in the command to become stone or iron. IBNASHUR-FULL: The wording اهبطوا rather than لنَهْبِط signals that Moses does not include himself; the threat recalls their desire for their former humiliating life."}, {"id": "2:61/q32/p3", "position": "A conditional permission to descend", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Their being commanded to descend while in the wandering was a punishment. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the command means to descend to one of the cities."}, {"id": "2:61/q32/p4", "position": "Descent in rank or dignity", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The wording اهبطوا rather than لنَهْبِط signals that Moses does not include himself; the threat recalls their desire for their former humiliating life. ASAD-NOTES: Habata literally means descending a slope and figuratively falling in dignity; since Moses' exclamation is not literal, Asad combines both senses as returning to Egypt in shame."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q33", "question": "How is ihbiṭū read?", "turns_on": "Kasra versus ḍamma on bāʾ.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q33/p1", "position": "Ḍamma on bāʾ", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The reading with a damma means descend to the place from the wilderness; h-b-ṭ can mean entering a valley or leaving it. RAZI-FULL: The usual reading of ihbiṭū is with bāʾ kasra; another reading has bāʾ ḍamma. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: A reading with ḍamma on the bāʾ in اهبطوا is another dialect form; kasra is more eloquent. ALUSI-FULL: A reading has أهبطوا with damma on both hamza and ba."}, {"id": "2:61/q33/p2", "position": "Kasra on bāʾ", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The usual reading of ihbiṭū is with bāʾ kasra; another reading has bāʾ ḍamma. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: A reading with ḍamma on the bāʾ in اهبطوا is another dialect form; kasra is more eloquent."}, {"id": "2:61/q33/p3", "position": "Two vowel forms are reported", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr rejects both a causal explanation and a command-answer reading: Moses is angry, not encouraging or persuading them to descend."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q34", "question": "What place-name syntax is compared with miṣr?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q34/p1", "position": "Place expressions involve omitted prepositions or fixed appositions", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (بعض المفسرين): Some exegetes are reported to take مصر in the verse as Egypt specifically. SIBAWAYH: Sībawayh distinguishes verbal-noun or direction expressions such as forward and back from place names, which instead involve an omitted preposition. SIBAWAYH: ʿĀmir ibn al-Ṭufayl's line uses place names; the intended sense includes the preposition bi, unlike the verbal-noun examples. SIBAWAYH: In expressions such as back and belly or plain and mountain, the second noun may be nominative as apposition or emphasis, or accusative in an expanded construction. SIBAWAYH: The implied sense is on the back and belly or in the plain and mountain; this is not ordinary adverbial syntax and is restricted to established pairs. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Khalīl reports the idiom مطرنا الزرع والضرع; Sībawayh allows its second nouns to be parsed as apposition, emphasis, or accusative. SIBAWAYH: Nominative forms such as night and day can be understood as apposition or as broad usage in which the time is treated as part of the expression. SIBAWAYH: Jarīr's verse treats night as a named part of the expression, supporting Sībawayh's broad nominative construction. SIBAWAYH: In the conditional examples, accusative follows one analysis, while nominative is possible when the clause means that truth or falsehood occurs or is present. SIBAWAYH: A pronoun may be clarified by an explicit body-part noun, as in the phrase about turning a back and belly; the poetry supplies parallel replacements. SIBAWAYH: Al-Jaʿdī's line permits أهلها
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
