<<chunk 19, part 1 of 0..4>>
lies that God left them to their own devices. TABRISI: On this reading, the speech ends with the promise that the produce they requested would be available in a settled city; the verse then begins a new account of Sabbath violators and prophet-killers. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The construction omits both a locative link, فيها, and the pronoun in سألتموه, with the conditions for ellipsis satisfied. SAMIN-DURR: ما is an accusative noun of إن, whose predicate is لكم; it means that which, with its resumptive pronoun omitted: الذي سألتموه. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حيان): Abū Ḥayyān reads فإن لكم ما سألتم as the answer to the command, allowing a nominal sentence to answer an imperative."}, {"id": "2:61/q41/p2", "position": "Kasra on initial sīn", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (النخعي وابن وثاب): Al-Nakhaʿi and Ibn Waththab read سألتم with kasra on the sīn, a dialectal form. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن وثاب والنخعي): Ibn Waththāb and al-Nakhaʿī read saʾaltum with kasrah on sīn; saʾalta and salta are both used, and yatasāwalan shows the wāw root. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (إبراهيم النخعي ويحيى بن وثاب): They read سألتم with a kasra on the initial sīn, a form produced by overlap between two verb patterns for سأل. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن جني): Ibn Jinni offers another account: hamza in سألتم became yāʾ as in a cited line, then the sīn was kasrated before yāʾ and the speaker restored hamza. ALUSI-FULL (النخعي ويحيى): Al-Nakhaʿi and Yahya read سألتم with kasra on the first letter."}, {"id": "2:61/q41/p3", "position": "Long-alif form", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (قرئ): A reading سلتم, like بعتم, is derived from the long-alif verb سال. SAMIN-DURR: Hassan's poem سالت هذيل رسول الله witnesses the long-alif form; the origin of its alif is disputed as yāʾ, waw, or hamza, with details deferred to 70:1."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q42", "question": "What does 'humiliation was struck upon them' express?", "turns_on": "The image of a tent or plaster versus the idiom of imposed obligation.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q42/p1", "position": "Imposes a binding condition", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Ḍuribat means imposed and made binding, as when an authority imposes tribute, tax, or conscription. WAHIDI-BASIT: The expression ‘struck upon’ extends to imposing an obligation, as in a levy imposed on a servant or merchants. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Was imposed upon them” means it was made binding on them. QURTUBI-FULL (الفرزدق): Al-Farazdaq's line to Jarīr uses ḍuribat for an affliction imposed and sealed by scripture. SAMIN-DURR: ضربت means imposed or decreed upon them, by analogy with erecting tents; al-Farazdaq's poem to Jarir uses ضربت عليك."}, {"id": "2:61/q42/p2", "position": "Surrounds like a pitched tent", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR: ضربت means imposed or decreed upon them, by analogy with erecting tents; al-Farazdaq's poem to Jarir uses ضربت عليك. IBNASHUR-FULL: ضرب originally means forceful contact between surfaces; related idioms extend it to strong attachment, such as fixing a tent or house to the ground. IBNASHUR-FULL: Al-Ṭībī takes the dependent-metaphor path, while al-Taftāzānī also treats the striking as a dependent metaphor and allows tent or clay as the comparison. IBNASHUR-FULL: The verse’s tent is only a figurative comparison, whereas the tent in Ziyād’s poem may be real; the verse is an explicit metaphor and the poem can be literal with an allusion. IBNASHUR-FULL (الطيبي): Al-Ṭībī emphasizes that the metaphor in the verse differs from Ziyād’s potentially literal tent."}, {"id": "2:61/q42/p3", "position": "The metaphor fixes the condition", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: The phrase ‘a lasting blow’ describes something enduring, and al-Nābigha uses it of evil that people do not think temporary. IBNASHUR-FULL: Verses by ʿAbda b. al-Ṭabīb and Ziyād al-Aʿjam attest ضرب بيتا and قبة ضربت for firmly setting up a dwelling."}, {"id": "2:61/q42/p4", "position": "Adheres like plaster on a wall", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: Al-Ṭībī takes the dependent-metaphor path, while al-Taftāzānī also treats the striking as a dependent metaphor and allows tent or clay as the comparison."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q43", "question": "When and on whom was the humiliation imposed?", "turns_on": "Whether the condition began in Moses' era, concerns later Jews, or applies to a subset.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q43/p1", "position": "Applies to later Jews", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (جماعة من المفسرين): One reported interpretation takes the humiliation as referring to the people living in Moses’ time; another takes it as referring to people in the Prophet’s time. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Many exegetes, including al-Kalbī, say humiliation and poverty began then as signs of hardship because God knew they would kill prophets, and their descendants inherited them. WAHIDI-BASIT: This points to a later application: before Islam they paid no jizya and were not marked by distinctive clothing. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The humiliation applies to Jews in the Prophet's era: it means the jizya and Jewish dress, imposed so they cannot escape; poverty is shown by its garb and visible misery. BAYDAWI-FULL: Jews are generally humiliated and poor, either actually or by affectation for fear of increased jizya. ALUSI-FULL: Their humiliation is retribution for ingratitude toward the blessing, linking this punishment to the preceding account; the third-person pronoun includes all Jews through later generations and is not an instance of iltifat."}, {"id": "2:61/q43/p2", "position": "The condition spans generations", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL: Humiliation and poverty surround and cling to them; Jews are subdued and poor either literally or by displaying poverty out of fear of an increased poll tax. IBNASHUR-FULL: The humiliation clause is a result of the earlier blessings of liberation and a land to inhabit, which they failed to value when they yearned for Egypt and shrank from entering the town. IBNASHUR-FULL: Their humiliation means they lost courage and displayed need despite abundant blessings; weariness made those blessings seem worthless, and greed persisted in their descendants."}, {"id": "2:61/q43/p3", "position": "Began in Moses' era", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (جماعة من المفسرين): One reported interpretation takes the humiliation as referring to the people living in Moses’ time; another takes it as referring to people in the Prophet’s time. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكلبي): Many exegetes, including al-Kalbī, say humiliation and poverty began then as signs of hardship because God knew they would kill prophets, and their descendants inherited them."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q44", "question": "How is ʿalayhim pronounced and explained?", "turns_on": "The transmitted hāʾ and mīm vowels and competing original-vowel or harmony analyses.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q44/p1", "position": "The pronoun follows transmitted dialects", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA: Vowel-following is not always productive analogy: some forms are transmitted, while it is regular in رد، عض، فر and apparently in مردفين. FARISI-HUJJA: Following kasra is already accepted on the mīm of an active-participle marker even though it obscures the pattern, making it still likelier on a pronoun marker. FARISI-HUJJA: Arabic allows vowel-following across an intervening consonant, as in أجوءك for أجيئك and منتن. FARISI-HUJJA: In منحدر, the ḍamma follows the inflectional ḍamma, as in ابنم، امرؤ، أخوك، فوك، and ذو مال. FARISI-HUJJA: أنبؤك can follow the inflectional ḍamma or the initial imperfect-prefix ḍamma, even across an intervening consonant. FARISI-HUJJA (عبد الله بن أبي إسحاق): Abū ʿUthmān reports through Maḥbūb and ʿĪsā that Ibn Abī Isḥāq read بين المرء وقلبه and said رأيت مرءا وهذا مرء. FARISI-HUJJA: The exceptional pronunciation هو يئبى does not refute the pattern because it is anomalous; يخطف has kasra to favor vowel-following. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو الحسن): Abū al-Ḥasan explains يخطف by first kasrating خ for two sukūns, then matching the prefix yāʾ to that kasra. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو الحسن): Abū al-Ḥasan reports from ʿĪsā ibn ʿUmar that some Arabs give three-letter nouns beginning with ḍamma a heavy pronunciation. FARISI-HUJJA: Forms of فم show case-conditioned endings (فوك، فاك، فيك); ذو مال behaves similarly but ذو does not take a pronominal suffix. FARISI-HUJJA: With a first-person suffix, فم ends in yāʾ in all cases because the following pronoun imposes kasra, unlike عصاي whose weak ending does not shift with case. FARISI-HUJJA: Following works alike when the triggering vowel is inflectional or built; the distinction does not change the pattern, as ابنم shows. FARISI-HUJJA: The proposal that ابنم’s nūn follows an added mīm is unsound: امرؤ shows the same following without deletion, and مرء is also attested. FARISI-HUJJA: The contrasting forms غد and غدو show that فم’s alternating deletion and completion is not a general consequence of matching وزن. FARISI-HUJJA: Vowel-following has two types: a non-inflectional vowel follows another non-inflectional vowel, as in مغيرة، منتن، يعفر، and ظلمات. FARISI-HUJJA: In the second type, a non-inflectional vowel follows an inflectional one, as in امرؤ، ابنم، فوك، أجوءك، and أنبؤك. FARISI-HUJJA: The examples of فم undermine the claim that these words are inflected in two places; movement can follow either inflection or construction. FARISI-HUJJA: The reversed pattern cited in the grammar book is too rare to establish a rule; comparison of inflection with building is likewise only an exceptional analogy. FARISI-HUJJA: The same principle explains ذال in مذ اليوم: its original ḍamma is retained when the consonant is moved. FARISI-HUJJA: Other readings likewise take more than one dialect form, including variants in أنعام، تكملوا، and يألتكم. FARISI-HUJJA (النبي): A transmitted prophetic report says the Qurʾān was revealed in seven modes, all healing and sufficient. FARISI-HUJJA (نافع): Nāfiʿ is reported to alternate between عليهمو and عليهم, another instance of using both dialect forms. FARISI-HUJJA: The objection that transitional movement should not trigger ḍamma on hāʾ only challenges the reading u
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
