<<chunk 19, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:61/q37", "question": "What does miṣr mean as a place word?", "turns_on": "Boundary and separation, foreign-name, and milking analogies.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q37/p1", "position": "A bounded or separated place", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL: Others derive miṣr from separating one thing from another. MAWARDI-FULL: A line by ʿAdi ibn Zayd uses miṣran for what separates day and night, as lexical evidence. WAHIDI-BASIT: Misr means a boundary; Adi ibn Zayd's verse makes the sun a boundary between day and night, and the word also means a house's limits or cultivated land separated from wilderness. TABRISI (بعضهم): One etymology derives Miṣr from being cut off from its surroundings by cultivation. TABRISI (آخرون): Another etymology derives Miṣr from its separation from other places. TABRISI (عدي بن زيد): Adi ibn Zayd's verse depicts the sun making Egypt a clear division between day and night, supporting the separation etymology. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عدي): ʿAdī’s verse uses miṣran to mean a boundary or limit between day and night. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مفضل الضبي): Al-Mufaḍḍal al-Ḍabbī explains Egypt’s name as the boundary between the eastern and western limits. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: In Hajar usage, miṣr means a place’s boundaries, as in a deed describing a house with its borders. QURTUBI-FULL: Miṣr originally means boundary; miṣr al-dār is the house's limit, and Ibn Fāris says people of Hajar used the term for property boundaries. QURTUBI-FULL (عدي): ʿAdī's line calls the sun a clear boundary dividing day from night, illustrating the root meaning. BAYDAWI-FULL: Miṣr can mean a great city; the word originally denotes a boundary between two things. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Miṣr can instead mean a boundary between two lands; Hajar writes bimuṣawrihā for its borders, and the poem depicts the sun as a boundary between day and night. SAMIN-DURR: In the basic language, المصر is the boundary between two things; people of Hajar used مصورها to mean a property's boundaries, and a poem calls the sun a boundary between day and night. ALUSI-FULL: أهبطوا مصرا is a separate reported sentence; it is unjoined because the first is declarative and the second is not, and because descending explains how they could exchange foods. ALUSI-FULL: مصر means a great town and originally denotes a boundary between two things; a quoted poetic line uses it for the boundary dividing day and night."}, {"id": "2:61/q37/p2", "position": "A disputed place-name derivation", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL: Some derive miṣr from cutting off, as the city is bounded off by its built-up area. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash explains declension despite proper-name and feminine status by the word's lightness from a still middle consonant. BIQAI-FULL: Egypt's name suits its gathering of worldly needs and unusual water; even if it came from a man's name, that coincidence reflects God's knowledge and wisdom over all its details. ALUSI-FULL: Place names can be masculine when considered as places and feminine when considered as lands; if مصر is a feminine town name it takes tanwin because its middle consonant is still."}, {"id": "2:61/q37/p3", "position": "An Arabized foreign name", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (قيل): One view identifies Egypt with Miṣrāyim, an Arabized form. BAYDAWI-FULL: Another account derives the name from Miṣrātim and says it was Arabized. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Some derive مصر from the Arabicized Misraim, a son of Noah who first laid out the city; Arabicization permits declension because foreignness no longer governs the form."}, {"id": "2:61/q37/p4", "position": "A name linked to drawing people", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن فارس): Some explain the name Miṣr by people’s intent toward it, like maṣartu al-shāh for milking a sheep because people flock there and rarely leave. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Miṣr means a city and may derive from milking a sheep completely, drawing everything from its udder. Against — ALUSI-FULL: Deriving the town name from milking every drop from a sheep is far-fetched."}, {"id": "2:61/q37/p5", "position": "A large settled town", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL: Miṣr can mean a great city; the word originally denotes a boundary between two things. ALUSI-FULL: مصر means a great town and originally denotes a boundary between two things; a quoted poetic line uses it for the boundary dividing day and night."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q38", "question": "How is the final rāʾ of miṣran recited?", "turns_on": "Whether tanwīn favors tafkhīm or the preceding vowel favors tarqīq at connection and pause.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q38/p1", "position": "Softened rāʾ", "reasons": "NASHR (طاهر بن غلبون): Some authorities, including Ṭāhir b. Ghalbūn, soften every tanwīn rāʾ without exception; al-Dānī read this from him. The readers exclude مصرا, إصرا, قطرا, وزرا, وقرا because of an emphatic consonant. NASHR (أبو عمرو الداني): Al-Dānī, Abū al-Fatḥ and Ibn Khāqān, Ibn Bulayma, Ibn al-Faḥḥām and al-Shāṭibī soften tanwīn rāʾ in both environments, including after silent yāʾ or adjacent kasra. NASHR (ابن سفيان): Ibn Sufyān and al-Mahdawī instead use tafkhīm in connected recitation because of tanwīn, then tarqīq at pause; this is a second face in al-Kāfī. NASHR (صاحب التبصرة): Al-Tabṣira uniquely reports a second view: a tanwīn rāʾ on the faʿīl pattern is softened at pause but emphatic in connection, attributed to Abū al-Ṭayyib."}, {"id": "2:61/q38/p2", "position": "Emphatic rāʾ", "reasons": "NASHR (طاهر بن غلبون): Some authorities, including Ṭāhir b. Ghalbūn, soften every tanwīn rāʾ without exception; al-Dānī read this from him. The readers exclude مصرا, إصرا, قطرا, وزرا, وقرا because of an emphatic consonant. NASHR (أبو شامة): Abū Shāma sees no difference between a fatḥa and ḍamma tanwīn rāʾ and says the ḍamma should more strongly favor tafkhīm; the author says al-Jaʿbarī adopted this and wrongly faulted al-Shāṭibī. NASHR (ابن سفيان): Ibn Sufyān and al-Mahdawī instead use tafkhīm in connected recitation because of tanwīn, then tarqīq at pause; this is a second face in al-Kāfī. NASHR (صاحب التبصرة): Al-Tabṣira uniquely reports a second view: a tanwīn rāʾ on the faʿīl pattern is softened at pause but emphatic in connection, attributed to Abū al-Ṭayyib."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q39", "question": "How does 'you have what you asked' connect to the command?", "turns_on": "Causal explanation, response to an imperative, or simple sequence marked by fāʾ.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q39/p1", "position": "The promise follows the command", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Moses rebuked them for exchanging the inferior produce of the earth for the better manna and quails, and told them to go down to a city where they could obtain what they requested. TAB-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya says their food was quail and their drink manna, and they asked for the produce listed in the verse. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari supplies the omitted event: Moses prayed, God answered him, and gave the Israelites what they had asked for. BAGHAWI-FULL: What they requested means the plants of the earth. TABRISI: One view says their request was no sin because they asked for another permissible food; Ṭabrisī prefers the view that it was sinful because they rejected God's choice and were reproached. RAZI-FULL: Nothing in the Quran says they were forbidden to request a different food, and the response granting what they asked for indicates the request was permissible; otherwise answering it would entail prophetic sin. QURTUBI-FULL: Third, what God gave them was more delicious than what they requested. QURTUBI-FULL: Mā is the object governed by inna in 'you have what you asked for.' ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The verb has a hamza-root pattern and a wāw-root pattern; يتساولان, analogous to يتجاوبان, supports the latter. ALUSI-FULL: The request is included in the account of blessings: God grants what they asked for by ordering them down to a town, although their ingratitude deserved wrath. IBNASHUR-FULL: The command ‘go down to a town’ is a comparable case where the intended relation is clear without inventing an implicit condition."}, {"id": "2:61/q39/p2", "position": "Promise explains command", "reasons": "BURSEVI: The promise that they will have what they asked for explains the command to descend. ALUSI-FULL: “You will have what you asked” explains the order to descend; al-Bahr instead calls it an answer to the imperative, which can be answered by a clause, with an implied link and pronoun: “therein” and “what you asked for.”"}, {"id": "2:61/q39/p3", "position": "Fāʾ marks sequence after descent", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL: The فاء in فإن لكم ما سألتم marks sequence: they obtain what they requested upon descending, rather than giving a reason for the command. IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr invokes ʿAbd al-Qāhir’s point that إن can itself link and motivate a clause; adding فاء therefore signals simple coordination and sequence."}, {"id": "2:61/q39/p4", "position": "Response to the imperative", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: فإن لكم ما سألتم answers the imperative like a jussive clause; grammarians dispute whether اهبطوا implies a conditional or has an omitted condition."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q40", "question": "Did they receive the food they asked for?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q40/p1", "position": "Receipt depends on descent", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says the Israelites had been given provisions in the wilderness but tired of them and asked for crops. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): An alternative report says they were given the food they asked for. BIQAI-FULL: In the city they will get what they requested, while manna and quail will cease."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q41", "question": "How is sāʾaltum read and formed?", "turns_on": "The initial sīn vowel and a long-alif dialectal verb form.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q41/p1", "position": "The common form is sāʾaltum", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says manna was honey sent from heaven and quail was their food; they knew no bread and asked for plants. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The statement فإن لكم ما سألتم imp
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
