<<chunk 19, part 4 of 0..4>>
erprets poverty as a tax or land levy. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak explains poverty as the jizya. MAWARDI-FULL (أبي العالية): Maskana may mean need, according to Abu al-ʿAliya, or poverty, according to al-Suddi. WAHIDI-BASIT (الليث): He derives مسكنة from سکون and defines it as the verbal noun of the poor person; its verb is تمسكن, ‘became poor.’ BAGHAWI-FULL: “Maskanah” means poverty; a poor person is so named because poverty stills and immobilizes him. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Al-Zajjaj derives maskana from stillness and says it is the appearance of poverty and subjection, which even a wealthy Jew retains. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya interprets maskana as poverty and need. TABRISI: Maskana derives from miskīn; here it means the humility and lowliness of poverty and need, with forms tamaskana and taskana also used. TABRISI: Maskana means the appearance of poverty; even their wealthy people feign destitution lest the tax be doubled. TABRISI (قوم): Some argue this verse shows wealth's merit because it condemns poverty. TABRISI: Ṭabrisī says that is not the right interpretation: the blame is for poverty of heart, since Jews can be materially wealthy yet spiritually needy; the Prophet says true wealth is of the soul. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو العالية، السدي، أبو عبيدة): One interpretation of maskana is poverty and destitution. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي): Al-Suddī also transmits an interpretation of maskana as poverty of the soul. RAZI-FULL: Al-maskana means poverty, need, and intensified hardship; this kind of suffering can function as punishment. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj takes maskanah as submissiveness, deriving it from stillness because poverty reduces movement. NASAFI-FULL: They may be poor in fact or display poverty and humility from fear that the jizya will be doubled. SAMIN-DURR: مسكنة is on the pattern مفعلة from stillness, since poverty leaves a person with little movement; مسكين follows مفعيل. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliyah, al-Rabi ibn Anas, and al-Suddi interpret miskinah as poverty. DURR-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya glosses miskena as poverty. ALUSI-FULL: The image alludes to their poll tax paid in submission, distinctive clothing that identifies them as Jews, ingrained miserliness and inner poverty, and their habit of displaying hardship to avoid increased tax. IBNASHUR-FULL: مسكنة means poverty, from stillness because poverty reduces a person’s movement; it also means weakness, and مسكين denotes a poor person."}, {"id": "2:61/q46/p2", "position": "Submissiveness or lowliness", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Here al-maskana means the humility and abasement that accompany want and poverty. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Al-Zajjaj derives maskana from stillness and says it is the appearance of poverty and subjection, which even a wealthy Jew retains. TABRISI: Maskana derives from miskīn; here it means the humility and lowliness of poverty and need, with forms tamaskana and taskana also used. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Another interpretation of maskana is submissiveness. QURTUBI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj takes maskanah as submissiveness, deriving it from stillness because poverty reduces movement. NASAFI-FULL: They may be poor in fact or display poverty and humility from fear that the jizya will be doubled. SAMIN-DURR: مسكنة is on the pattern مفعلة from stillness, since poverty leaves a person with little movement; مسكين follows مفعيل. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines maskanah as outwardly visible lowliness or submission, shown in stillness and a slackening of movement. ALUSI-FULL: The image alludes to their poll tax paid in submission, distinctive clothing that identifies them as Jews, ingrained miserliness and inner poverty, and their habit of displaying hardship to avoid increased tax. IBNASHUR-FULL: مسكنة means poverty, from stillness because poverty reduces a person’s movement; it also means weakness, and مسكين denotes a poor person."}, {"id": "2:61/q46/p3", "position": "A tax or land levy", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies those under abasement and poverty as people subject to levies; the author clarifies that these are jizya payers. IBNABIHATIM (عطية): Atiyya interprets poverty as a tax or land levy. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak explains poverty as the jizya. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada interpret maskana as the poll tax, jizya. TABRISI: Maskana means the appearance of poverty; even their wealthy people feign destitution lest the tax be doubled. NASAFI-FULL: They may be poor in fact or display poverty and humility from fear that the jizya will be doubled. IBNKATHIR-FULL (عطية العوفي): Atiyya al-Awfi interprets miskinah as a tax or land levy. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak also glosses miskinah as jizya. ALUSI-FULL: The image alludes to their poll tax paid in submission, distinctive clothing that identifies them as Jews, ingrained miserliness and inner poverty, and their habit of displaying hardship to avoid increased tax."}, {"id": "2:61/q46/p4", "position": "A poverty-related condition", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-maskana is the verbal noun of miskīn; Arabic also uses forms such as tamaskana and tamaskunan. NAHHAS: ما is accusative as the noun of فإن لكم ما سألتم; الذلة is the passive subject of ضربت, and المسكنة is coordinated with it. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): He explains مسكنة as conditions that still and restrain a person; مسكين was then understood as if its initial mīm belonged to the root, by analogy with other formations. SAMIN-DURR (الراغب): Al-Raghib says the mīm in مسكنة is extra in the stronger view; citing the dispute also suggests the nūn is extra and the root is مسك. SAMIN-DURR: The mīm recurs in تمسكن and متمسكن, but this does not make it a root letter: derivation shows it is extra, as with تمندل and تمذرع."}, {"id": "2:61/q46/p5", "position": "Outward appearance of poverty", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Al-Zajjaj derives maskana from stillness and says it is the appearance of poverty and subjection, which even a wealthy Jew retains. TABRISI: Maskana means the appearance of poverty; even their wealthy people feign destitution lest the tax be doubled. NASAFI-FULL: They may be poor in fact or display poverty and humility from fear that the jizya will be doubled. ALUSI-FULL: The image alludes to their poll tax paid in submission, distinctive clothing that identifies them as Jews, ingrained miserliness and inner poverty, and their habit of displaying hardship to avoid increased tax."}, {"id": "2:61/q46/p6", "position": "Poverty of heart", "reasons": "TABRISI: Ṭabrisī says that is not the right interpretation: the blame is for poverty of heart, since Jews can be materially wealthy yet spiritually needy; the Prophet says true wealth is of the soul. TABRISI (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet is reported to say that true wealth is wealth of the soul. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي): Al-Suddī also transmits an interpretation of maskana as poverty of the soul."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
