<<chunk 19, part 2 of 0..4>>
nder a different analysis; it does not touch his explanation. FARISI-HUJJA: Weak radicals remain deleted in forms such as رمت المرأة and لم يخف الرجل despite a vowel inserted for two sukūns; if that vowel counted, forms like لم يقولا would retain the radical. FARISI-HUJJA: The poetic restorations أجره الرمح and ولا تهاله are too rare to outweigh the ordinary evidence against counting the transitional vowel. FARISI-HUJJA: The retained yāʾ in لم يكن الذين كفروا is a stronger counterexample because it is frequent and occurs in revelation. FARISI-HUJJA: Poetic deletion can restore an underlying form for metrical necessity, as ضننوا, although ordinary usage keeps the consonant. FARISI-HUJJA: In اضرب الاثنين and اكتب الاسم, the imperative lām remains kasrated because movement of the article lām for two sukūns counts like its being still. FARISI-HUJJA: Although the article lām attaches closely and adds definiteness, it behaves like a separate element because it is not part of the word’s root, as in hesitation forms ألي. FARISI-HUJJA: Jussive حذف of nūn in لم يضربا and لم يضربوا shows that transitional movement is not counted like a stable vowel. FARISI-HUJJA: Identical consonants do not assimilate when the second is moved only for two sukūns, another sign that this movement is disregarded. FARISI-HUJJA: Ordinary ḍamma on wāw can permit its replacement by hamza, as in أقتت، أدؤر، and النئوور; the next argument tests transitional ḍamma. FARISI-HUJJA: Wāw is not replaced by hamza when its ḍamma is only transitional; reports that some do so are treated as mistakes. FARISI-HUJJA: A non-obligatory vowel behaves like a transitional one: in رمتا and غزتا, the weak radical stays deleted as in رمت المرأة. FARISI-HUJJA: For the poetic form لها متنتان خظاتا, al-Fārisī prefers the account of metrical restoration over deleting the dual nūn, since such deletion occurs with relatives. NASAFI-FULL (الكسائي): Al-Kisa'i is reported to read the following word as حفوا. NASHR: The passage notes a disagreement over sukūn versus ḍamma on ʿayn in a catalogue of words, but this excerpt supplies no reader assignments. NASHR: The author points back to the earlier discussion of reading the hāʾ and mīm in عليهم الذلة with either ḍamma or kasra. NASHR (نافع): Nāfiʿ’s hamza treatment of النبياء, النبيئين, النبيء and النبوة is referred to the separate hamza chapter. QIRAAT-ER: The ḍamma on hāʾ is a canonical vowel-harmony variant of the kasra form and does not alter meaning. QIRAAT-ER: The kasra on mīm is a canonical case-vowel variant of the ḍamma form, varying in pause or connection without changing meaning."}, {"id": "2:61/q44/p2", "position": "Kasra on hāʾ and mīm", "reasons": "IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The kasra reading of both hāʾ and mīm in عليهم reflects the hāʾ's proximity to yāʾ and the need to break the meeting of two sukūns. FARISI-HUJJA: Abu ʿAmr kasras the pronoun mīm because its underlying connected form ended in yāʾ; after deletion, the mīm resumes that original vowel when moved. FARISI-HUJJA: He treats Abu ʿAmr’s kasra like the original ḍamma of Ibn Kathīr, Nāfiʿ, ʿĀṣim, and Ibn ʿĀmir, preferring an original vowel to an added one. FARISI-HUJJA (سيبويه): Sībawayh’s vocative truncation of Rād retains its original vowel at a consonant meeting, an analogy al-Fārisī uses for Abu ʿAmr. NASAFI-FULL (حمزة وعلى): Hamzah and al-Kisa'i have a distinct vocalization of the pronoun in عليهم; Abu Amr kasras both hā and mīm, while the other readers kasra the hā and damma the mīm. NASAFI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abu Amr reads the pronoun with kasra on both hā and mīm; the remaining readers kasra hā and damma mīm."}, {"id": "2:61/q44/p3", "position": "Ḍamma on hāʾ and mīm", "reasons": "IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: Al-Kisāʾī matches Ḥamza here but differs in أنعمت عليهم: there mīm stays still, avoiding a shift from yāʾ to ḍamma; here hāʾ returns to its original vowel before mīm is moved. FARISI-HUJJA (حمزة): Ḥamza moves the mīm in عليهم، لديهم، and إليهم with ḍamma, matching the pronoun hāʾ, which he also pronounces with ḍamma. FARISI-HUJJA: Because Ḥamza gives hāʾ its underlying ḍamma, the mīm takes that original vowel rather than an added kasra; no reader with hāʾ-ḍamma kasras this mīm. FARISI-HUJJA (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī joins Ḥamza in ḍamma on عليهم and لديهم, though they normally kasra this hāʾ outside the relevant environments. FARISI-HUJJA: Al-Kisāʾī and Ḥamza use two dialect forms, a choice that broadens and eases recitation and accords with the transmitted seven modes."}, {"id": "2:61/q44/p4", "position": "Kasra on hāʾ, ḍamma on mīm", "reasons": "IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: A kasra on hāʾ with ḍamma on mīm combines yāʾ proximity with the mīm's original ḍamma, needed to avoid two sukūns."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q45", "question": "What is the imposed dhilla?", "turns_on": "General humiliation, jizya, distinctive dress, or another levy.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q45/p1", "position": "Abasement and humiliation", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Al-dhilla means abasement or lowliness. ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة والحسن): The humiliation imposed on them means that they pay the poll tax by hand while subdued. TAB-FULL: Al-dhilla is abasement and humiliation, the state of subjection imposed on them. TAB-FULL: The abasement is linked to the rule that protection under continued unbelief is withheld unless the People of the Book pay jizya in submission. TAB-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): They explain the imposed humiliation as paying the jizya while subdued. ZAJJAJ: “Dhilla” is abasement and “maskana” is submission or humility; the latter derives from stillness, since poverty reduces a poor person’s movement. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن، قتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada explain abasement as paying the jizya while subdued. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak glosses abasement as humiliation. RUMMANI: The metaphor of striking humiliation upon them makes its imposition perceptible and suggests degradation, intensifying the rebuke and aversion from their condition. THALABI: Ḍuribat means “was imposed” or “made binding”; al-dhilla is abasement and humiliation, explained as the jizya, with a supporting verse. THALABI: Miskana means possessing poverty; people may look poor while wealthy. It can also mean humiliation and poverty of heart; miskīn derives from stillness and few movements. MAWARDI-FULL: Al-dhilla can mean humiliation and abasement, or the imposition of jizya, the latter according to al-Hasan and Qatada. WAHIDI-BASIT: ‘They were struck with humiliation’ means it was imposed on them so firmly that it did not leave them; the image is of one thing affixed to another, like a nail driven in. WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن وقتادة): They interpret the humiliation as paying the jizya while subdued. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيد عن الكسائي): ذلة means abasement: a docile horse is the opposite of a difficult one, while a man is described as ذليل or ذلة. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): He favors the interpretation that humiliation followed their descent into Egypt: the omitted connective sense is that they descended, acted corruptly, and were then struck with humiliation. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء بن السائب): He identifies the humiliation with the Jewish distinguishing badge and clothing, and poverty with a poor appearance; even a wealthy Jew appeared impoverished for fear of increased jizya. WAHIDI-BASIT: The apparent objection that wealthy Jews cannot be poor is answered by taking humiliation as jizya and poverty as inward poverty of heart and soul, whose effects need not show outwardly. WAHIDI-BASIT: ‘That’ points back to the humiliation, poverty, and wrath just mentioned. JISHUMI: The promised provision is the plant food they had asked for; being struck with humiliation means being bound to disgrace, or being charged jizya, as in the tribute verse. BAGHAWI-FULL: One view interprets humiliation as the jizya tax. BAGHAWI-FULL (عطاء بن السائب): ʿAta ibn al-Saʾib explains humiliation as the Jewish kistīj, zunnār, and distinctive clothing. BAGHAWI-FULL: Even wealthy Jews appear poor, and one view identifies humiliation as poverty of the heart; the Jews are described as especially abject and greedy for wealth among religious communities. KASHSHAF-FULL: Humiliation surrounds them like a tent, or sticks to them like plaster; Jews are lowly and destitute either in reality or by feigning poverty to avoid a higher poll tax. IBNATIYYA-FULL: ذلك points to the imposition of humiliation and what follows; the bāʾ in بأنهم marks cause. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The humiliation and poverty were imposed and decreed for them; ضرب is used in idioms for imposing or binding an obligation, and the verbal noun is annexed semantically to its object. TABRISI: Ḍuribat ʿalayhim al-dhilla means humiliation was imposed on them, by analogy with a ruler imposing a tax. TABRISI (قوم): Another explanation says they settled in the abode of humiliation, using the idiom of pitching tents. TABRISI (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada interpret the humiliation as the subjection expressed in paying jizya under Quran 9:29. TABRISI (عطاء): Ata says the humiliation refers to the Jewish kistīj, a distinctive belt and dress. TABRISI (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says God exchanged the Jews' honor for humiliation, prosperity for misery, and approval for anger, as requital for disbelief and unjust killing of prophets. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Being struck with humiliation means being made to bear it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan interprets the imposed humiliation as the jizya tax. RAZI-FULL: Razi concludes that the request was permissible, so the humiliation and divine anger were causedby the subsequent disbelief and killing of prophets, not by asking for other food. RAZI-FULL: Humiliation was made to surround and adhere to them, like someone inside a tent or clay stuck to a wall; the more likely meaning is deserved humiliation. RAZI-FULL: The view that humiliation means specifically the jizya is unlikely because jizya was not imposed on them from the beginning. RAZI-FULL (المعتزلة): The Muʿtazilites argue that if God creates disbelief just as 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
