<<chunk 19, part 3 of 0..4>>
He creates humiliation and poverty, there is no reason to make one the recompense for the other rather than the reverse. QURTUBI-FULL: Ḍuribat ʿalayhim means humiliation and poverty were imposed and decreed, an image compared to pitching tents; the verb can mean a judge imposed a penalty. QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurṭubī glosses dhillah as abasement and maskanah as poverty, claiming that even a rich Jew displays poverty's dress, submission, and humiliation. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbaydah glosses dhillah as lowliness; maskanah is the verbal noun of miskīn. QURTUBI-FULL (الضحاك بن مزاحم عن ابن عباس): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk transmits Ibn ʿAbbās's explanation of the people struck by humiliation and poverty as holders of tax-farming contracts. BAYDAWI-FULL: Humiliation and poverty enveloped or clung to them like a canopy or plaster on a wall, as requital for ingratitude. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: ذلك may point to the punishment of wrath, or to the blow of humiliation and poverty. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The first causal clause explains humiliation and wrath; the second points to disbelief and killing, mapping the two punishments to those two causes as a balanced luff-and-nashr and avoiding redundancy. SAMIN-DURR: الذلة means humiliation; ذل with ḍamma is subjection imposed by coercion, while ذل with kasra follows resistance without coercion, as al-Raghib says. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Humiliation and poverty were imposed on them by divine decree and law; they remain subdued and are humiliated by whoever gains power over them. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada explain the imposed humiliation as paying jizya by hand while subdued. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak glosses dhilla as abasement. BIQAI-FULL: Humiliation is pictured as a covering that surrounds Israel on every side, and the word denotes inward smallness under domination. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies those struck with humiliation and poverty as the people who pay jizya. BURSEVI: Their humiliation and poverty are retribution for ingratitude; the image is like plastering clay onto a wall, and even wealthy Jews seem poor. BURSEVI: Dhilla means humiliation and maskana means poverty; the poor are called miskīn because poverty stills them and impedes movement. BURSEVI: Humiliation and poverty surround and cling to them like a dome, becoming an inescapable covering. ALUSI-FULL: The image of humiliation being laid over them evokes either a tent or dome set over people or clay plastered onto a wall; the metaphor conveys encompassing, adherence, and humiliation. ELMALILI: Their humiliation and misery are pictured as a structure built or a stamp set upon them, leaving them under contempt, heavy taxes, poverty, and destitution. IBNASHUR-FULL: The phrase may be a concealed metaphor: humiliation and poverty are pictured as a tent or house fixed around them, with ضرب as an imaginative metaphor. IBNASHUR-FULL: Another analysis makes ضربت a dependent metaphor for humiliation adhering like clay to a wall, without a concealed metaphor. IBNASHUR-FULL (التفتزاني): Al-Taftāzānī reads either metaphorical analysis as an allusion to the Jews’ humiliation; Ibn ʿĀshūr says these rhetorical insights can coexist. IBNASHUR-FULL: ذلة means disgrace or abasement, is pronounced with kasra only, and opposes honor; al-Samawʾal or al-Ḥārithī contrasts the two in a verse. IBNASHUR-FULL: The باء is causal: disbelief and the related acts caused worldly humiliation and poverty and God’s anger, warning against repeating them. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The denunciation is stronger in Āl ʿImrān: it universalizes humiliation with “wherever they are found” and repeats the verb and preposition before poverty; al-Baqara simply joins humiliation and poverty."}, {"id": "2:61/q45/p2", "position": "Subjection through jizya", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة والحسن): The humiliation imposed on them means that they pay the poll tax by hand while subdued. TAB-FULL: The abasement is linked to the rule that protection under continued unbelief is withheld unless the People of the Book pay jizya in submission. TAB-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): They explain the imposed humiliation as paying the jizya while subdued. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن، قتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada explain abasement as paying the jizya while subdued. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Al-Hasan says this ummah overtook them, and even the Magians collected jizya from them. THALABI: Ḍuribat means “was imposed” or “made binding”; al-dhilla is abasement and humiliation, explained as the jizya, with a supporting verse. MAWARDI-FULL: Al-dhilla can mean humiliation and abasement, or the imposition of jizya, the latter according to al-Hasan and Qatada. WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن وقتادة): They interpret the humiliation as paying the jizya while subdued. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء بن السائب): He identifies the humiliation with the Jewish distinguishing badge and clothing, and poverty with a poor appearance; even a wealthy Jew appeared impoverished for fear of increased jizya. WAHIDI-BASIT: The apparent objection that wealthy Jews cannot be poor is answered by taking humiliation as jizya and poverty as inward poverty of heart and soul, whose effects need not show outwardly. JISHUMI: The promised provision is the plant food they had asked for; being struck with humiliation means being bound to disgrace, or being charged jizya, as in the tribute verse. BAGHAWI-FULL: One view interprets humiliation as the jizya tax. KASHSHAF-FULL: Humiliation surrounds them like a tent, or sticks to them like plaster; Jews are lowly and destitute either in reality or by feigning poverty to avoid a higher poll tax. TABRISI (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada interpret the humiliation as the subjection expressed in paying jizya under Quran 9:29. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan interprets the imposed humiliation as the jizya tax. Against — RAZI-FULL: The view that humiliation means specifically the jizya is unlikely because jizya was not imposed on them from the beginning. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Ḥasan and Qatādah explain dhillah as the obligation of paying jizyah. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak transmits from Ibn Abbas that the people described are holders of jizya obligations. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الحسن وقتادة): Al-Hasan and Qatada explain the imposed humiliation as paying jizya by hand while subdued. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan says God left them without protection and beneath Muslims' feet; this community encountered them while Magians collected jizya from them. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies those struck with humiliation and poverty as the people who pay jizya. DURR-FULL (قتادة والحسن): Qatada and Hasan say they pay the jizya by hand while subdued."}, {"id": "2:61/q45/p3", "position": "A tax or levy", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة والحسن): The humiliation imposed on them means that they pay the poll tax by hand while subdued. THALABI (unidentified speaker): An unidentified gloss identifies the term with al-kastibinj, a Jewish weight. BAGHAWI-FULL: One view interprets humiliation as the jizya tax. KASHSHAF-FULL: Humiliation surrounds them like a tent, or sticks to them like plaster; Jews are lowly and destitute either in reality or by feigning poverty to avoid a higher poll tax. TABRISI: Ḍuribat ʿalayhim al-dhilla means humiliation was imposed on them, by analogy with a ruler imposing a tax. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan interprets the imposed humiliation as the jizya tax. QURTUBI-FULL (الضحاك بن مزاحم عن ابن عباس): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk transmits Ibn ʿAbbās's explanation of the people struck by humiliation and poverty as holders of tax-farming contracts. ELMALILI: Their humiliation and misery are pictured as a structure built or a stamp set upon them, leaving them under contempt, heavy taxes, poverty, and destitution."}, {"id": "2:61/q45/p4", "position": "An imposed low condition", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Al-Hasan says God humiliated them, left them without protection, and placed them under the Muslims' feet. IBNATIYYA-FULL: ذلة is a state or condition derived from ذل. TABRISI: Dhilla derives from the verb meaning to be humbled or low. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ treats dhilla and dhull as synonyms. SAMIN-DURR: ضربت is passive, with الذلة as its نائب الفاعل. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali reads the conjunction as signaling many omitted intervening events: Israel was placed where it had lowered itself, and enemies then subdued and humiliated those who remained."}, {"id": "2:61/q45/p5", "position": "Distinctive Jewish clothing", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء بن السائب): He identifies the humiliation with the Jewish distinguishing badge and clothing, and poverty with a poor appearance; even a wealthy Jew appeared impoverished for fear of increased jizya. BAGHAWI-FULL (عطاء بن السائب): ʿAta ibn al-Saʾib explains humiliation as the Jewish kistīj, zunnār, and distinctive clothing. TABRISI (عطاء): Ata says the humiliation refers to the Jewish kistīj, a distinctive belt and dress. QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurṭubī glosses dhillah as abasement and maskanah as poverty, claiming that even a rich Jew displays poverty's dress, submission, and humiliation."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q46", "question": "What is the imposed maskana?", "turns_on": "Material poverty, outward appearance, inward need, submission, or levy.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q46/p1", "position": "Material poverty or need", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Al-maskana is the verbal noun of miskīn; an example calls the poorer of two men the more miskīn. TAB-FULL: Here al-maskana means the humility and abasement that accompany want and poverty. TAB-FULL (أبو العالية): Abu al-Aliya glosses al-maskana as need or destitution. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi glosses the imposed maskana as poverty. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas identifies those under abasement and poverty as people subject to levies; the author clarifies that these are jizya payers. IBNABIHATIM (أبو العالية): Al-Aliyah explains poverty as indigence; al-Suddi and al-Rabi' gave the same explanation. IBNABIHATIM (عطية): Atiyya int
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
