<<chunk 20, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:61/q47", "question": "What does bāʾū bi-ghaḍab mean?", "turns_on": "Return, bearing, deserving, settling, equivalence, and acknowledgment idioms.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q47/p1", "position": "Return bearing wrath", "reasons": "AKHFASH: باءوا بغضب means they returned bearing it or that it came upon them; the verb is also used in باء بذنبه. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Bāʾū means they returned; the verb is used as bǔtu bi-kadhā and abūʾu bihi, not bāʾa bi-l-shayʾ. TAB-FULL: Bāʾū means they turned back bearing something; the verb is joined to either good or evil, as in the verse about bearing another’s sin. TAB-FULL: They returned carrying God’s anger, which had settled on them and made them liable to His displeasure. THALABI (الكسائي وغيره): They gloss bawāʾū bi-ghaḍab as “returned.” MAWARDI-FULL (الكسائي): Al-Kisaʾi says bāʾū means they returned with God's wrath; return must be accompanied by something good or evil. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): He glosses باءوا بغضب as ‘they returned.’ WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): He cites the report ‘Ṭalḥa returned with Paradise’ to illustrate باء as returning with something. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: To incur or return bearing something is the meaning of باؤوا; they incurred God's anger because they disbelieved signs sent to Muhammad. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Bāʾū” means they returned, and the expression is used only of an evil thing. TABRISI: They returned bearing God's anger, which was due upon them and had overtaken them. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Bāʾū means they returned. RAZI-FULL: The word bāʾū can mean they returned, and it is only used with evil; al-Zajjaj gives another view that it means God's anger was made equal to them. QURTUBI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned and remained bound to the consequence; the root means return, including the prayer acknowledging and binding oneself to God's blessing. QURTUBI-FULL: Bawāʾ can mean returning retribution for blood or equal status in a matter, as poetry also describes return with captives and spoils. BAYDAWI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned carrying anger or became deserving of God's anger; the idiom means someone is liable to be killed for another, and its root connotes equality. NASAFI-FULL: To incur God's anger means to become deserving of it, by analogy with one who is liable to be killed in return for an equal victim. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If باء means return, its preposition marks accompanying state; if it means deserve, the preposition completes the verb; if it means settle or become equal, it is locative, with different attachment analyses. SAMIN-DURR: البواء can mean return in retaliation, and people may be بواء, equal in a matter; the poem لا يبوء الدم بالدم means blood is not repaid with blood in retribution. SAMIN-DURR: بغضب is a circumstantial phrase describing those who returned: they returned under wrath, not with wrath as a direct object. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir explains bāʾū as returning while carrying something; here they returned burdened with God's anger, paralleling 5:29. BIQAI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned, and they deserved the anger; the phrase can mean being liable to be killed in equivalence for another's killing. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali glosses their return with anger as a powerful ruler's resolve to exact vengeance for defiance. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada glosses ba'u as turning back or returning. BURSEVI: To “return bearing” God’s anger means they deserved and bound themselves to it; the Prophet’s wording “I acknowledge” illustrates the verb. ALUSI-FULL: باءوا may mean they settled into worldly trials, afterlife punishment, or hardships in both worlds; it may also mean that wrath came upon them, so no object of “return” is needed. IBNASHUR-FULL: باءوا means return, metaphorically describing a reversal from a state pleasing to God into His anger."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p2", "position": "Bear or incur wrath", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Humiliation imposed on the Jews means the jizya, and neediness means poverty; they incurred God's anger. MAJAZ: Bāʾū bi-ghaḍab means that they bore or took on the anger. AKHFASH: باءوا بغضب means they returned bearing it or that it came upon them; the verb is also used in باء بذنبه. TAB-FULL: Bāʾū means they turned back bearing something; the verb is joined to either good or evil, as in the verse about bearing another’s sin. TAB-FULL: They returned carrying God’s anger, which had settled on them and made them liable to His displeasure. ZAJJAJ: The expression “bāʾū bi-ghaḍab” means that they bore or incurred the wrath. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr explains incurring God's anger as deserving His displeasure. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيدة): He explains باؤوا بغضب as bearing it; al-Zajjāj gives the same lexical gloss for the related wording in 2:90 and for 5:29. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): He derives the root from equality: people are بواء when equal, a spear is aligned toward a horseman, and bloods are equal; bearing a sin is carrying it evenly. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: To incur or return bearing something is the meaning of باؤوا; they incurred God's anger because they disbelieved signs sent to Muhammad. BAGHAWI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda says “bāʾū” means they bore and acknowledged the wrath, as in the prayer “I acknowledge Your favor and my sin.” KASHSHAF-FULL: To incur God's wrath means to become deserving of it, like someone who merits being killed in retaliation for an equal victim. TABRISI (قوم): Some say bāʾū means they confessed what incurred God's wrath; an anonymous verse uses the verb for admitting fault and sin. TABRISI: They returned bearing God's anger, which was due upon them and had overtaken them. RAZI-FULL: A third interpretation of bāʾū is that they deserved the anger, as in 5:29, where tabūʾ means to incur or deserve the two sins. BAYDAWI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned carrying anger or became deserving of God's anger; the idiom means someone is liable to be killed for another, and its root connotes equality. NASAFI-FULL: To incur God's anger means to become deserving of it, by analogy with one who is liable to be killed in return for an equal victim. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: باءوا may carry a present-tense sense, as in other expressions where an impending event is stated in the past tense. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says they incurred God's anger. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جرير): Ibn Jarir explains bāʾū as returning while carrying something; here they returned burdened with God's anger, paralleling 5:29. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says they incurred and deserved God's anger. BURSEVI: To “return bearing” God’s anger means they deserved and bound themselves to it; the Prophet’s wording “I acknowledge” illustrates the verb. ELMALILI: They incurred God's anger and deserved it; their state was extinguished, their society scattered, and they became those described in al-Fātiḥa as subject to wrath."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p3", "position": "Deserve or become liable to wrath", "reasons": "AKHFASH: باءوا بغضب means they returned bearing it or that it came upon them; the verb is also used in باء بذنبه. TAB-FULL: They returned carrying God’s anger, which had settled on them and made them liable to His displeasure. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabiʿ says that anger from God befell them. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says they deserved God’s anger. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr explains incurring God's anger as deserving His displeasure. IBNABIHATIM (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi' says God's anger came upon them; al-Dahhak gave a similar account. THALABI (أبو روق): Abū Rawq glosses the phrase as “deserved”; he considers the bāʾ an extra particle. WAHIDI-BASIT (لبيد): Labīd’s line likewise uses بؤت بحقها for accepting or acknowledging its due right. KASHSHAF-FULL: To incur God's wrath means to become deserving of it, like someone who merits being killed in retaliation for an equal victim. TABRISI: They returned bearing God's anger, which was due upon them and had overtaken them. RAZI-FULL: A third interpretation of bāʾū is that they deserved the anger, as in 5:29, where tabūʾ means to incur or deserve the two sins. BAYDAWI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned carrying anger or became deserving of God's anger; the idiom means someone is liable to be killed for another, and its root connotes equality. NASAFI-FULL: To incur God's anger means to become deserving of it, by analogy with one who is liable to be killed in return for an equal victim. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If باء means return, its preposition marks accompanying state; if it means deserve, the preposition completes the verb; if it means settle or become equal, it is locative, with different attachment analyses. SAMIN-DURR (الراغب): Al-Raghib explains باؤوا بغضب as settling in a place with wrath; باء signals that their fitting place carries God's anger, and he compares the ironic announcement in 3:21. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari reads باء فلان بفلان as deserving to be killed in retaliation for him, hence becoming deserving God's wrath; this makes the bāʾ phrase unlike a circumstantial phrase. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi ibn Anas says anger from God was brought down upon them; Saʿid ibn Jubayr says they deserved divine displeasure. BIQAI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned, and they deserved the anger; the phrase can mean being liable to be killed in equivalence for another's killing. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says they incurred and deserved God's anger. BURSEVI: To “return bearing” God’s anger means they deserved and bound themselves to it; the Prophet’s wording “I acknowledge” illustrates the verb. ALUSI-FULL: باءوا may mean they settled into worldly trials, afterlife punishment, or hardships in both worlds; it may also mean that wrath came upon them, so no object of “return” is needed. ALUSI-FULL: Other interpretations say they became fitting for wrath or deserved punishment; the author calls the latter account far-fetched. ELMALILI: They incurred God's anger and deserved it; their state was extinguished, their society scattered, and they b
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
