<<chunk 20, part 4 of 0..4>>
 to kill them again in the evening. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن مسعود): A report from Ibn Masud says the Israelites killed seventy prophets; another version says three hundred in the morning, with killings openly active by evening. BURSEVI: A report says the Israelites killed seventy prophets in one day."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q55", "question": "How is the killing verb read?", "turns_on": "Light third-person form, intensified gemination, or second-person address.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q55/p1", "position": "Intensive doubled consonant", "reasons": "THALABI: The common reading has yaqtulūn with light consonants; al-Sulamī reads it with shadda, expressing intensive killing. JISHUMI (السلمي): The common reading has light yaqtulūn; al-Sulamī reads it with an intensified consonant. KASHSHAF-FULL (علي رضي الله عنه): Ali reads the verb with gemination, emphasizing repeated killing. SAMIN-DURR: ويقتلون is coordinated in the accusative with كان's predicate; one reading shifts to direct address, while gemination in يقتّلون marks repeated killing. ALUSI-FULL (علي والحسن): ʿAli and, in one report, al-Hasan read يقتلون with a doubled qaf."}, {"id": "2:61/q55/p2", "position": "Light third-person form", "reasons": "THALABI: The common reading has yaqtulūn with light consonants; al-Sulamī reads it with shadda, expressing intensive killing. JISHUMI (السلمي): The common reading has light yaqtulūn; al-Sulamī reads it with an intensified consonant. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن بن أبي الحسن): Al-Hasan ibn Abi al-Hasan reads وتقتلون in the second person, returning to direct address; a third-person reading is also reported from him. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan has a variant reading of yaqtulūn; another transmission from him matches the common reading. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Hasan reads وتقتلون with second-person address, an instance of turning to address; another report gives the common third-person reading."}, {"id": "2:61/q55/p3", "position": "Second-person address", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن بن أبي الحسن): Al-Hasan ibn Abi al-Hasan reads وتقتلون in the second person, returning to direct address; a third-person reading is also reported from him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Hasan reads وتقتلون with second-person address, an instance of turning to address; another report gives the common third-person reading. SAMIN-DURR: ويقتلون is coordinated in the accusative with كان's predicate; one reading shifts to direct address, while gemination in يقتّلون marks repeated killing. ALUSI-FULL (الحسن): In another reading, al-Hasan uses second-person تقتلون, creating a shift in address."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q56", "question": "How can prophets be killed despite divine protection?", "turns_on": "Protection in fighting or mission, victory through proof, and rank through martyrdom.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q56/p1", "position": "Fighting prophets were not killed", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan says God never ordered a prophet to wage war and then let him be killed; He allowed unbelievers to kill prophets who had not been commanded to fight. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس وغيره): Ibn Abbas and others say only prophets not commanded to fight were killed; every prophet commanded to fight was victorious. TABRISI (الحسن): Al-Hasan says God never ordered a prophet to fight and then be killed in battle; those killed were killed outside combat. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan say prophets not commanded to fight could be killed, while every prophet commanded to fight was victorious. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس وغيره): Ibn Abbas and others say prophets not commanded to fight were killed, while every prophet commanded to fight was victorious. BURSEVI (ابن عباس والحسن): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Ḥasan say only prophets not commanded to fight were killed, while every prophet commanded to fight was granted victory. ALUSI-FULL (بعض المحققين): The preferred answer limits the promised messengers to those commanded to fight; their exposure to death is not incompatible with divine wisdom."}, {"id": "2:61/q56/p2", "position": "Their deaths raised their rank", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL: One theological explanation is that God allowed unbelievers to kill some prophets so they could attain otherwise unreachable high ranks; this was not abandonment by God. QURTUBI-FULL: God's allowing disbelievers to kill prophets honors them and raises their rank, as with believers slain in God's cause; it is not abandonment. BURSEVI: Allowing prophets to be killed honors them and raises their rank, as with believers killed in God’s path; it is not abandonment."}, {"id": "2:61/q56/p3", "position": "They completed revelation before death", "reasons": "TABRISI: Ṭabrisī's preferred view is that God may not allow a prophet's death before he completes his assigned revelation, since that would undermine the obligations and their benefits; once he has delivered it, God may allow his killers and need not prevent it. IBNASHUR-FULL: The text says prophets rather than messengers because enemies cannot overcome messengers without undermining the purpose of revelation; the claim that Jews killed Jesus conflicts with that wisdom, since God ended his mission after its aim was achieved."}, {"id": "2:61/q56/p4", "position": "Divine protection does not preclude all prophetic deaths", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: An atheist alleges a contradiction between Israelite prophet-killing and God's promise to help His messengers. ALUSI-FULL: The distinction fails because 2:87 also says that some messengers were killed."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q57", "question": "What is implied by the prophet plural used here?", "turns_on": "Whether the plural forms imply number here or converge when definite.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q57/p1", "position": "The plurals differ in pattern", "reasons": "AKHFASH: Both النبيين and الأنبياء are forms used by Arab speakers for the plural of prophet. MAWARDI-FULL: Nabī has the plural form nabāʾ, used by Abbas ibn Mirdas in a verse praising the Prophet. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The dominant plural أنبياء resembles defective forms such as walī/awliyāʾ and ṣafī/aṣfiyāʾ. SAMIN-DURR: The second cited poetic use places a النبي at a mountain, while نبيئة is reported as a disparaging diminutive for Musaylima; أنبياء follows the regular plural pattern of weak فعيل nouns. ALUSI-FULL: The plural نبيين is challenged because a passive participle is not normally given the sound masculine plural; a reply says the word is active, or that its original sense has faded so the common meaning permits the plural."}, {"id": "2:61/q57/p2", "position": "The definite plurals mean the same", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو علي): Abu Ali calls the greeting report's chain weak; he says the Prophet's silence when praised as خاتم النبآء strengthens its weakness, since the plural and singular follow the same pattern. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: When definite, النبيين and الأنبياء do not differ in meaning; without the article, the sound plural suggests few and the broken plural suggests many. ELMALILI: Nabī derives from nabaʾ and originally means one who brings news by revelation from God; it is equivalent to prophet, with plurals anbiyāʾ and nabiyyīn."}, {"id": "2:61/q57/p3", "position": "The sound plural can suggest few", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: When definite, النبيين and الأنبياء do not differ in meaning; without the article, the sound plural suggests few and the broken plural suggests many. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The author treats al-nabiyyīn in al-Baqara as a plural of paucity and al-anbiyāʾ in Āl ʿImrān as a plural of abundance, underscoring the latter’s greater condemnation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: When a sound masculine plural appears alongside a broken plural of abundance, he says it indicates paucity; without that pairing it can denote either few or many."}, {"id": "2:61/q57/p4", "position": "The broken plural can suggest many", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: When definite, النبيين and الأنبياء do not differ in meaning; without the article, the sound plural suggests few and the broken plural suggests many. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The author treats al-nabiyyīn in al-Baqara as a plural of paucity and al-anbiyāʾ in Āl ʿImrān as a plural of abundance, underscoring the latter’s greater condemnation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: When a sound masculine plural appears alongside a broken plural of abundance, he says it indicates paucity; without that pairing it can denote either few or many."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
