<<chunk 20, part 3 of 0..4>>
y", "reasons": "TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj explains that the wrath came upon them because of their disbelief in God's signs. TABRISI: Dhālika points back to the wrath, humiliation, and poverty already mentioned as caused by their disbelief in God's signs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The signs are attributed to God because they originate from Him. SAMIN-DURR: The phrase بآيات الله attaches to يكفرون, and its باء marks transitivity. BIQAI-FULL: Kānū depicts a settled natural disposition; yakfurūna describes continuing, renewed concealment of assent and belief in God's signs, misleading those unaware of them."}, {"id": "2:61/q51/p5", "position": "Proofs of God's oneness", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali ranks denial of God's signs as farthest from faith and nearer than denial of God, since the former rejects manifest evidence while the latter rejects the unseen."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q52", "question": "How is prophet-killing attributed to these Israelites?", "turns_on": "Direct perpetrators versus later people approving or following them.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q52/p1", "position": "Offenders among Israel are charged", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The signs of God they disbelieved in mean the Qur'an; they killed prophets unjustly because they disobeyed and transgressed in their religion. MAWARDI-FULL: A report describes a man bringing his brother's killer to the Prophet, who says “he is equivalent to him,” meaning the killer takes the victim-killer's place. QURTUBI-FULL: The verse permits eating wholesome, pleasurable foods; the Prophet liked sweets and honey and drank cool, fresh water. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The wording does not imply any prophets were killed justly: prophets cannot deserve execution; the qualification shames and condemns the killers, who claimed no justified basis even by their own standard. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Their humiliation, poverty, and wrath resulted from rejecting miraculous signs that should have led to faith and killing prophets whose guidance brings worldly honor and salvation; earlier disobedience and transgression led to those acts. IBNKATHIR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says the most severely punished at the Resurrection include someone killed by a prophet or who killed a prophet, a deviant leader, and an image-maker. ALUSI-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffal says they claimed prophets were liars and their miracles deceptions, and killed them for this reason and to suppress what they regarded as truth. IBNASHUR-FULL: The charge of killing prophets covers Jewish generations who killed, ordered, or silently failed to defend them."}, {"id": "2:61/q52/p2", "position": "Later Israelites share guilt through solidarity", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL: Their humiliation and anger followed their arrogance against truth, disbelief in God's signs, and dishonoring prophets and their followers until they killed prophets."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q53", "question": "Which prophets are said to have been killed?", "turns_on": "Named reports versus general reference to Israelite prophets.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q53/p1", "position": "God's prophets generally", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says God replaced their honor with humiliation, blessing with hardship, and favor with anger for disbelief, killing prophets, wrongful aggression, and disobedience. TAB-FULL: The phrase bima means ‘because of’: their punishment was for disbelief in God’s signs and killing prophets unjustly. TAB-FULL: The prophets are God’s messengers, sent to convey what He commissioned them to tell their audiences. KASHSHAF-FULL: Their disobedience means committing many sins and transgressing God's limits in every matter, alongside disbelief and prophet-killing. TABRISI (أبو علي): Abu Ali says nabāwa means elevation, which is not necessarily prophethood, whereas a messenger from God is precisely described by nabaʾ, news. TABRISI: Dhālika bimā ʿaṣaw refers to their Sabbath violation and killing prophets, or to breaking the covenant and assaulting prophets; God acted against them for disobedience and transgression. RAZI-FULL: Their killing of prophets also makes them deserve the preceding punishment; disbelief in God's signs means ignorance and denial and does not itself include killing prophets. RAZI-FULL: The punishment's causes are ordered excellently: first offenses against God through ignorance and denial, then killing prophets, then personal sins, and finally sins against others through aggression. BAYDAWI-FULL: Their disobedience, persistence, and transgression led them into disbelief in signs and killing prophets. NASAFI-FULL: The final that may point to unbelief and killing prophets together with the other acts of disobedience. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (علي): Ali's doubled-consonant reading يقتّلون intensifies the sense of repeated killing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (صاحب المنتخب): The punishment is explained by causes ordered by gravity: first disbelief in God's signs, then killing prophets, then lesser sins and transgression. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another explanation takes transgression as persistence in disobedience and killing prophets. IBNKATHIR-FULL (عبد الله بن مسعود): Ibn Masud reports Malik ibn Marara asking whether his good looks and wish no one surpass him by two sandal straps count as arrogance; the Prophet says arrogance is rejecting truth and belittling people. BIQAI-FULL: The author's description treats killing prophets as a settled disposition and habit. DURR-FULL (ابن مسعود): The Prophet says the most severely punished at Resurrection include a killer of a prophet or someone killed by a prophet, a leader of misguidance, and an image maker. BURSEVI: This account does not conflict with 40:51 or 37:171–172; alternatively, victory can mean victory through proof and disclosure of truth, which every prophet had. BURSEVI: The Mathnawī couplet links foolishness with killing prophets and alludes to people calling the messengers ill omens. BURSEVI: Persistent disobedience and transgression led to the previously described disbelief and prophet-killing. ALUSI-FULL: The root باء first denotes equality of parts and then any equivalence or matching, as in saying someone is another's equal and in cited idioms and a prophetic warning. ALUSI-FULL: Attributing the signs to God intensifies the condemnation; disbelief is mentioned first because it is the gravest offense, then prophet-killing as its consequence or source. ALUSI-FULL (بعض المتأخرين): A later scholar says the qualifier is useful if غير means “for a cause other than the truth”: they killed prophets for falsehood and to defend it. ALUSI-FULL: The final ذلك points back to disbelief and prophet-killing as causes of the earlier punishments; a singular demonstrative can gather several matters by treating them as one mentioned event. STUDYQURAN: The killing of prophets recurs in Qurʾānic passages and has parallels in Luke, Matthew, Romans, 1 Thessalonians, and 1 Kings."}, {"id": "2:61/q53/p2", "position": "Isaiah, Zechariah, John and others", "reasons": "THALABI: The prophets killed unjustly include Isaiah, Zechariah, John, and the other prophets killed by the Jews. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): The prophets meant include Zakariyyā, Yaḥyā, and Isaiah, along with the other prophets the Jews killed. KASHSHAF-FULL: The demonstrative refers to humiliation, indigence and incurring wrath, caused by disbelief and killing prophets; the Jews killed Isaiah, Zechariah, John and others. QURTUBI-FULL: Dhālika explains the cause: they disbelieved in God's book and prophets' miracles, including those of Jesus, John, Zechariah, and Muhammad, and killed prophets. BAYDAWI-FULL: They killed Isaiah, Zechariah, John, and others without grounds even by their own standards; desire and worldly love drove them. NASAFI-FULL: Their unbelief and killing of prophets caused their punishment; the prophets killed by the Jews included Isaiah, Zechariah and John. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The prophets they killed included John, Isaiah, and Zechariah. ALUSI-FULL: That false accusation explains many cases, but Isaiah, John, and Zechariah were killed for other reasons: Isaiah rebuked factional violence after a king's death, John was killed over a woman, and Zechariah was sawn in two inside a tree while fleeing the king. ELMALILI: Their punishment came because they disbelieved God's manifest signs and unjustly killed prophets, including Isaiah, Zechariah, and John. IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr says Isaiah son of Amoz, alive in the mid-eighth century BCE, was sawn on a tree by King Manasseh around 700 BCE. IBNASHUR-FULL: Herod killed John son of Zechariah because Herod’s niece was angry with John. ASAD-NOTES: The passage concerns a later phase of Jewish history; Asad cites John the Baptist and Gospel accusations by Jesus, plus accounts of Zachariah's murder, as evidence that Jews killed prophets."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q54", "question": "How many prophets were reportedly killed?", "turns_on": "The different transmitted counts of prophets and worshippers.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q54/p1", "position": "Three hundred prophets in one day", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (عبد الله بن مسعود): Ibn Mas'ud reports that the Israelites killed three hundred prophets in a day and continued killing them through the evening. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عبد الله بن مسعود): Ibn Masʿūd reports that Israelites killed three hundred prophets in one day, then opened their vegetable market that evening. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن مسعود): A report from Ibn Masud says the Israelites killed seventy prophets; another version says three hundred in the morning, with killings openly active by evening. ALUSI-FULL: The indefinite plural النبيين appears fewer than الأنبياء, while the two forms are equivalent when definite, so the report that they killed three hundred prophets in one morning does not contradict the wording."}, {"id": "2:61/q54/p2", "position": "Seventy prophets in a morning or hour", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL: A report says the Jews killed seventy prophets in the morning and set up a marketplace
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
