<<chunk 20, part 1 of 0..4>>
ecame those described in al-Fātiḥa as subject to wrath."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p4", "position": "Become matched or equivalent", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (أبو العباس المبرد): Al-Mubarrad derives bāʾū from station or position: they came to occupy a station of God's wrath; a retaliation report says the killer becomes equivalent to the slain brother's killer. MAWARDI-FULL (أبو إسحاق الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj derives bāʾū from equality: they were made equal in wrath. MAWARDI-FULL: Layla al-Akhyaliyya's verse uses bawāʾ for equivalence between slain parties, supporting the interpretation of bāʾū. MAWARDI-FULL (عبادة بن الصامت): A report from ʿUbada ibn al-Samit says the Prophet distributed spoils among them on an equal basis, illustrating bawāʾ as equality. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): He derives the root from equality: people are بواء when equal, a spear is aligned toward a horseman, and bloods are equal; bearing a sin is carrying it evenly. WAHIDI-BASIT (عبادة بن الصامت): A report from him says the Prophet divided spoils equally among the people; عن بواء means on an equal basis. KASHSHAF-FULL: To incur God's wrath means to become deserving of it, like someone who merits being killed in retaliation for an equal victim. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the root sense of bāʾū is equalization. TABRISI (عبادة بن الصامت): Ubada ibn al-Samit reports that the Prophet distributed the spoils equally among the recipients, illustrating bāʾūʾan as equal shares. TABRISI: A line of poetry uses bawāʾ for an equal or balanced exchange, while noting that blood is not measured out like goods. RAZI-FULL: The word bāʾū can mean they returned, and it is only used with evil; al-Zajjaj gives another view that it means God's anger was made equal to them. QURTUBI-FULL: Bawāʾ can mean returning retribution for blood or equal status in a matter, as poetry also describes return with captives and spoils. BAYDAWI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned carrying anger or became deserving of God's anger; the idiom means someone is liable to be killed for another, and its root connotes equality. NASAFI-FULL: To incur God's anger means to become deserving of it, by analogy with one who is liable to be killed in return for an equal victim. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If باء means return, its preposition marks accompanying state; if it means deserve, the preposition completes the verb; if it means settle or become equal, it is locative, with different attachment analyses. SAMIN-DURR: البواء can mean return in retaliation, and people may be بواء, equal in a matter; the poem لا يبوء الدم بالدم means blood is not repaid with blood in retribution. SAMIN-DURR (الراغب): Al-Raghib says البواء originally means equal parts sharing one place, contrasted with النبوة, the parts' incompatibility. SAMIN-DURR (خلف الأحمر): Khalaf al-Ahmar says حياك الله وبياك originally was بوأك and changed for sound-pattern matching. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari reads باء فلان بفلان as deserving to be killed in retaliation for him, hence becoming deserving God's wrath; this makes the bāʾ phrase unlike a circumstantial phrase. BIQAI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned, and they deserved the anger; the phrase can mean being liable to be killed in equivalence for another's killing."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p5", "position": "God's anger came upon them", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (الكسائي): He glosses باءوا as ‘they departed with it’ and says the verb always takes something good or bad, not bare departure. IBNATIYYA-FULL (المهدوي): Al-Mahdawi says bāʾ means lām, yielding the sense 'because they'. IBNATIYYA-FULL: ذلك refers back to the earlier indication and reinforces it; the bāʾ in بما expresses cause. TABRISI (قوم): Some explain the wrath as worldly affliction and retribution replacing ease and blessing. RAZI-FULL: The usual reading is atastabdilūna; Ubayy b. Kaʿb's codex has atubaddilūna with bāʾ quiescent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: In the construction, الذي is the object and denotes what is gained, while the item introduced by باء is what is given up. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض الناس): Some claim باء is used only in evil contexts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Describing the wrath as being from God magnifies and exalts its seriousness. SAMIN-DURR: A poem's آبوا is wrongly offered as evidence for باء: it belongs to آَبَ يَؤوب, with radicals hamza-waw-bāʾ, unlike باء يبوء; reversing the roots is unattested. BIQAI-FULL: The word dhālika may refer either to the anger and punishment they suffered or to their intense concern for livelihood and desires in this base fashion. ALUSI-FULL: Describing the wrath as coming from God heightens and magnifies its severity. IBNASHUR-FULL: The pronoun in وضربت عليهم ... وباءوا refers to all Israelites, including later generations; the addressed Israelites are included by implication through inherited ancestral traits."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p6", "position": "Acknowledge or admit", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (لبيد): Labīd’s line likewise uses بؤت بحقها for accepting or acknowledging its due right. BAGHAWI-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abu ʿUbayda says “bāʾū” means they bore and acknowledged the wrath, as in the prayer “I acknowledge Your favor and my sin.” TABRISI (قوم): Some say bāʾū means they confessed what incurred God's wrath; an anonymous verse uses the verb for admitting fault and sin. QURTUBI-FULL: Bāʾū means they returned and remained bound to the consequence; the root means return, including the prayer acknowledging and binding oneself to God's blessing. BURSEVI: To “return bearing” God’s anger means they deserved and bound themselves to it; the Prophet’s wording “I acknowledge” illustrates the verb."}, {"id": "2:61/q47/p7", "position": "Settle in a station of wrath", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: They returned carrying God’s anger, which had settled on them and made them liable to His displeasure. MAWARDI-FULL (أبو العباس المبرد): Al-Mubarrad derives bāʾū from station or position: they came to occupy a station of God's wrath; a retaliation report says the killer becomes equivalent to the slain brother's killer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: If باء means return, its preposition marks accompanying state; if it means deserve, the preposition completes the verb; if it means settle or become equal, it is locative, with different attachment analyses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: In ذلك بأنهم, ذلك is the subject, the following prepositional phrase its predicate, and باء marks cause: this happened because they disbelieved and killed. ALUSI-FULL: باءوا may mean they settled into worldly trials, afterlife punishment, or hardships in both worlds; it may also mean that wrath came upon them, so no object of “return” is needed."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q48", "question": "What is meant by God's wrath here?", "turns_on": "Divine will, censure, worldly affliction, or afterlife punishment.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q48/p1", "position": "Condemnation and punishment", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Thus the wrath is pictured as settled equally upon them; God’s wrath means His condemnation and punishment, not a human-like emotional state. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Wrath meaning will is an essential attribute, while wrath displayed through punishment is an attribute of action. TABRISI (آخرون): Others take the wrath as punishment for their sins in the afterlife. RAZI-FULL: God's anger means His will to exact punishment. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Wrath here can mean the worldly calamities and punishments that befell them or punishment awaiting them in the afterlife. BURSEVI: God’s anger means His censure of them in this world and punishment in the next."}, {"id": "2:61/q48/p2", "position": "God's will to punish", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Wrath meaning will is an essential attribute, while wrath displayed through punishment is an attribute of action. RAZI-FULL: God's anger means His will to exact punishment."}, {"id": "2:61/q48/p3", "position": "Afterlife punishment", "reasons": "TABRISI (آخرون): Others take the wrath as punishment for their sins in the afterlife. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Wrath here can mean the worldly calamities and punishments that befell them or punishment awaiting them in the afterlife."}, {"id": "2:61/q48/p4", "position": "Divine displeasure", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurṭubī says the meaning of divine anger has already been treated in the Fātiḥah. ELMALILI: After explaining the divine anger, the author transitions by asking whether any possibility of deliverance remains for them."}, {"id": "2:61/q48/p5", "position": "Worldly affliction", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Wrath here can mean the worldly calamities and punishments that befell them or punishment awaiting them in the afterlife."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q49", "question": "What does the first dhālika point to?", "turns_on": "All punishments, wrath alone, or their concern for livelihood.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q49/p1", "position": "Humiliation, poverty, and wrath together", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The demonstrative dhālika gathers the multiple punishments just described: humiliation, poverty, and God’s anger. ZAJJAJ: “That” refers to the wrath that came upon them because they disbelieved in God’s signs. BAGHAWI-FULL: “That” refers to the wrath just mentioned. TABRISI: Ṭabrisī says dhālika points back to the wrath in bāʾū bi-ghaḍab; the causal phrase is governed by the predicate, and the deleted clause is understood from what follows. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The demonstrative that refers either to God’s wrath alone or to all that was imposed on them, including humiliation and poverty. BAYDAWI-FULL: The demonstrative points back to the humiliation, poverty, and incurring of anger. NASAFI-FULL: The first that refers to the imposed humiliation, poverty and deserved anger. SAMIN-DURR: The demonstrative ذلك points back to the humiliation, poverty, and incurring of wrath; the clause بأنهم is its predicate and explains the cause of that fate. BURSEVI: “That” refers to the humiliation, poverty, their bearing the anger, and the great wrath. ALUSI-FULL: The demonstrative refers to the preceding humiliation, poverty, and wrath; its distance may reflect the interve
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
