<<chunk 20, part 2 of 0..4>>
ning material, their surprising punishment despite being People of the Book, or the enormity of these deeds. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda challenged Ruʾba’s singular كأنه when the poet had named plural lines, and Ruʾba replied that he meant ذلك, the whole matter. IBNASHUR-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshāf explains singular demonstrative and relative forms by saying their grammatical number and gender are not literal. Against — IBNASHUR-FULL: Ibn ʿĀshūr finds that explanation of little value because it still relies on interpretation or metaphor, with no special advantage for these forms. IBNASHUR-FULL: He suggests al-Kashshāf may mean that ذا and الذي denote a genus, while their dual and plural forms are separate words rather than inflections of a singular."}, {"id": "2:61/q49/p2", "position": "The fate just described", "reasons": "TABRISI: He applies the same parsing to dhālika bimā ʿaṣaw, with mā and its clause interpreted as a verbal noun. RAZI-FULL (الفريق الأول): The first group answers Abu Muslim that the standard reading is with tanwin and that the apparent general choice can be restricted to this specific city by their earlier evidence. RAZI-FULL (الفريق الأول): The first group replies to Abu Muslim that property may be limited, as with pledged and leased property, so prior evidence overrides the default that ownership permits unrestricted use. SAMIN-DURR: يكفرون is the accusative predicate of كان; كان and its clause predicate أن, while the أن-clause is governed by باء and that phrase predicates ذلك. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): A reported alternative takes the causal باء to mean “with,” and links the demonstrative to the earlier punishment; it omits a conjunction to show that each wrongdoing independently deserves punishment. ALUSI-FULL: The author rejects that alternative as repetitious and as losing the earlier subtle causal relation; it also leaves the demonstrative without a clear purpose. IBNASHUR-FULL: The singular demonstrative ذالك summarizes the preceding statement as one mentioned matter; the punishment terms themselves are unseen and are not pointed to as objects."}, {"id": "2:61/q49/p3", "position": "God's wrath alone", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: “That” refers to the wrath that came upon them because they disbelieved in God’s signs. BAGHAWI-FULL: “That” refers to the wrath just mentioned. TABRISI: Ṭabrisī says dhālika points back to the wrath in bāʾū bi-ghaḍab; the causal phrase is governed by the predicate, and the deleted clause is understood from what follows. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The demonstrative that refers either to God’s wrath alone or to all that was imposed on them, including humiliation and poverty."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q50", "question": "What does the second dhālika point to?", "turns_on": "Repetition of punishment versus disbelief and killing as later outcomes.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q50/p1", "position": "The earlier matter is resumed", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The repeated demonstrative reiterates the previous reference. TABRISI: Those who read without hamza cite the Quranic plural anbiyaʾ, whose pattern commonly comes from weak-final nouns, as evidence that the singular's hamza was replaced. RAZI-FULL: A second answer is emphatic repetition, as in 23:117, whose wording that an idol has no proof makes the added denial rhetorically emphatic."}, {"id": "2:61/q50/p2", "position": "It repeats the earlier punishment", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: The second dhālika points back to and reinforces the first; bi in bimā marks cause, and al-Akhfash glosses it as 'because of their disobedience.' BAYDAWI-FULL (قيل): The repeated demonstrative stresses that their punishment resulted both from disbelief and killing and from their sins and transgression. SAMIN-DURR: The repeated demonstrative ذلك either emphasizes the earlier reference or, with al-Zamakhshari, points specifically to disbelief and killing the prophets as caused by persistent disobedience and transgression."}, {"id": "2:61/q50/p3", "position": "It points to disbelief and killing", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (قيل): The repeated demonstrative stresses that their punishment resulted both from disbelief and killing and from their sins and transgression. BAYDAWI-FULL (قيل): Alternatively, the demonstrative refers to disbelief and killing, with bāʾ meaning ‘along with’; a singular demonstrative can cover multiple matters under a contextual singular expression or ellipsis. BAYDAWI-FULL: Rubaʾ's description of a cow uses a singular pronoun for multiple marks, illustrating that demonstratives and pronouns are not strictly marked for real number or gender; alladhī can likewise mean plural. SAMIN-DURR: The repeated demonstrative ذلك either emphasizes the earlier reference or, with al-Zamakhshari, points specifically to disbelief and killing the prophets as caused by persistent disobedience and transgression."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q51", "question": "Which signs did they reject?", "turns_on": "Miracles, scriptures, Muhammad's description, or God's proofs generally.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q51/p1", "position": "Revealed scriptures and verses", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari says neither the Qur'an nor a decisive prophetic report settles which interpretation is correct, and exegetes disagree. THALABI: Their unbelief in God’s signs concerns the description of Muḥammad as merciful in the Torah, Gospel, and Qurʾān. WAHIDI-BASIT (غيره): Another exegetical view identifies the signs as Muhammad’s description and the stoning verse. BAGHAWI-FULL: The signs they disbelieved in included Muhammad's description, the Torah's stoning verse, the Gospel, and the Qurʾan. IBNATIYYA-FULL: آيات may mean the nine signs and other extraordinary signs proving the truth of the messenger, or the signs of the Torah analogous to Quranic signs. TABRISI: One explanation takes God's signs to mean the Gospel and Quran, making the first wrath for rejecting Jesus and the Gospel and a second for rejecting Muhammad and the Quran; another takes them as Muhammad's attributes. BAYDAWI-FULL: Alternatively, the signs are revealed scriptures, including the Gospel, Qurʾān, stoning verse, and the Torah's description of Muhammad. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The Israelites asked Moses to pray because a prophet’s prayer was more likely to be answered; saying your Lord reflects his special closeness through conversation and revelation of the Torah. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: They said your Lord because God had specially favored Moses through intimate speech and giving him the Torah, so they hoped He would answer Moses’s prayer for them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): God's signs may mean Moses's nine miracles and others, the Torah, selected Torah passages, the Qur'an, or all signs revealed to the messengers. BIQAI-FULL: The author links denial of God's signs to the Qur'anic description of such deniers as companions of ill fortune. BURSEVI: Their disbelief also involved rejecting the Qur’an and Muhammad, denying his description in the Torah, and rejecting Jesus and the Gospel. ALUSI-FULL: They say “your Lord” because Moses had a special intimacy with God through His favor, direct speech, and the Torah, as if asking him to pray to the benefactor who favored him. ALUSI-FULL: The signs may mean miracles generally, Moses's nine signs, those nine and other miracles, revealed scriptural signs generally, the Torah or some of its verses, verses describing Muhammad, the stoning passages, or the Qur'an."}, {"id": "2:61/q51/p2", "position": "Muhammad's description", "reasons": "THALABI: Their unbelief in God’s signs concerns the description of Muḥammad as merciful in the Torah, Gospel, and Qurʾān. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): He says the signs of God they disbelieved in refer to the wisdom sent down to Muhammad. WAHIDI-BASIT (غيره): Another exegetical view identifies the signs as Muhammad’s description and the stoning verse. BAGHAWI-FULL: The signs they disbelieved in included Muhammad's description, the Torah's stoning verse, the Gospel, and the Qurʾan. TABRISI: One explanation takes God's signs to mean the Gospel and Quran, making the first wrath for rejecting Jesus and the Gospel and a second for rejecting Muhammad and the Quran; another takes them as Muhammad's attributes. BAYDAWI-FULL: Alternatively, the signs are revealed scriptures, including the Gospel, Qurʾān, stoning verse, and the Torah's description of Muhammad. BIQAI-FULL: The author links denial of God's signs to the Qur'anic description of such deniers as companions of ill fortune. BURSEVI: Their disbelief also involved rejecting the Qur’an and Muhammad, denying his description in the Torah, and rejecting Jesus and the Gospel. ALUSI-FULL: The signs may mean miracles generally, Moses's nine signs, those nine and other miracles, revealed scriptural signs generally, the Torah or some of its verses, verses describing Muhammad, the stoning passages, or the Qur'an."}, {"id": "2:61/q51/p3", "position": "Miracles shown to Israel", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: آيات may mean the nine signs and other extraordinary signs proving the truth of the messenger, or the signs of the Torah analogous to Quranic signs. RAZI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars regard the prediction of their humiliation and poverty as a miracle because the Prophet foretold it and it occurred, revealing unseen knowledge. BAYDAWI-FULL: God's signs may mean miracles they experienced: the sea split, clouds shaded them, manna and quails descended, and springs burst from stone. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): God's signs may mean Moses's nine miracles and others, the Torah, selected Torah passages, the Qur'an, or all signs revealed to the messengers. BURSEVI: God’s signs include the conspicuous miracles shown through Moses, whether familiar or unfamiliar. ALUSI-FULL: The signs may mean miracles generally, Moses's nine signs, those nine and other miracles, revealed scriptural signs generally, the Torah or some of its verses, verses describing Muhammad, the stoning passages, or the Qur'an."}, {"id": "2:61/q51/p4", "position": "God's signs generall
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
