<<chunk 21, part 3 of 0..5>>
ity need prophets?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q66/p1", "position": "Humanity needs prophetic guidance", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: When people leave prophetic guidance they fall into false belief, moral corruption, greed, oppression, and violence; God mercifully sends prophets to rescue humanity and show the way to happiness in both lives, with Muhammad last. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The commentary traces modern Western departure from prophecy from deism through positivism and Marxism to atheism, warning that modern capabilities magnify threats to human values and existence and demonstrate prophecy’s necessity."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q67", "question": "Why is Muhammad the final prophet?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q67/p1", "position": "Muhammad is the final prophet", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Earlier lost or altered scriptures required new revelation and prophets, but the preserved Quran leaves no need for another prophet after Muhammad; the Quran is final scripture and Muhammad the seal of prophets."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q68", "question": "What number and first prophet are reported?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q68/p1", "position": "Adam is first; later numbers are disputed", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Adam was the first human and first prophet; the Quran provides no count of later prophets and names twenty-eight, while whether Luqman, Dhu al-Qarnayn, and Uzayr were prophets or saints is disputed."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q69", "question": "Why does the verse add 'without right'?", "turns_on": "Emphasis, absence of any charge, and definite versus indefinite legal right.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q69/p1", "position": "The killing was wholly unjust", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Killing prophets without right means killing God’s messengers without His authorization, while denying their missions and prophethood. THALABI: A report says the Jews killed seventy prophets in one hour early in the day; 112 Israelite worshippers ordered right and forbade wrong, and were all killed by day’s end. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): The phrase بغير الحق grammatically modifies the killing and means that the killing was unjust. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The charge of killing the prophets refers to siding with those who committed the killings; killing them without right means killing them unjustly. BAGHAWI-FULL: “Without right” means without any crime. BAGHAWI-FULL: Although killing prophets is always wrongful, “without right” describes the killing, as “judge with truth” describes judgment without implying that judgment divides into just and unjust kinds. TABRISI: Killing the prophets without right means without any offense, as in the killings of Zechariah and John. TABRISI: God allowed prophets to be killed so they could attain ranks unavailable otherwise; allowing murder of believers and righteous people likewise does not mean God has abandoned them. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Ḥaqq can mean a crime or offense in the phrase “without right.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Bi-ghayri l-ḥaqq can mean without any crime or offense. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: A third view describes their killing as unjust, just as God’s judgment is described as right without implying He judges otherwise. RAZI-FULL: One answer to why the text says without right is that people may commit a wrong act believing it justified through a doubt, but these people knew their killing was wrong and did it anyway. SAMIN-DURR: بغير الحق is either a circumstantial phrase describing the killers as acting wrongly, or an adjective to an omitted verbal noun meaning an unlawful killing. SAMIN-DURR: باء بكذا can also mean acknowledge or admit; the cited prophetic report means accepting the favor and binding oneself to it, and poetry uses بؤت بحقها. SAMIN-DURR (الراغب): Al-Raghib says interpreting بؤت بحقها as I admitted its right does not follow the word's lexical implication. BIQAI-FULL: Because a prophet is protected in religion and worldly life, killing him is never truly justified; the phrase stresses the absence of fully clear right, even if killers claim a pretext such as suspecting false prophethood. BIQAI-FULL: The blame concerns shedding blood without complete clarity, consistent with the prohibition against killing a protected person except by right. BIQAI-FULL: A claimed suspicion, such as believing someone falsely claimed prophethood, does not excuse killing without certainty. ALUSI-FULL: The apparent syntax makes بغير الحق a contested modifier governed by both disbelief and killing; al-Bahr attaches it to the nearby killing alone. ALUSI-FULL: A more apparent reading takes الحق generically, meaning no right at all; the parallel wording in 3:112 supports this and means the killings were unjust even in their own view. ALUSI-FULL: The phrase may simply expose the escalating ugliness of their conduct—killing a prophet, killing a group, and doing so without right—which best fits the ordinary sense of prohibition regardless of the killer's beliefs. IBNASHUR-FULL: Zechariah, John’s father, was killed by Herod while trying to save his son from execution during Jesus’s prophethood."}, {"id": "2:61/q69/p2", "position": "It intensifies condemnation", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (قيل): Another view treats بغير الحق as emphatic, since killing a prophet could only be unlawful; the text gives ‘hearts that are in the chests’ as a parallel. IBNATIYYA-FULL: بغير الحق intensifies the atrocity and sin: although no prophet could rightly be killed, the phrase rules out a conceivable excuse; no prophet committed a crime warranting execution, and God allowed some to be killed as an honor raising their rank, like martyrs among believers. TABRISI: The qualifier 'without right' does not imply that prophets could ever be killed justly; it emphasizes that their killing was sheer injustice, like the cited Quranic and poetic examples. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: A second view treats bi-ghayri l-ḥaqq as emphatic, as in the statement that hearts in breasts grow blind. QURTUBI-FULL: 'Without right' magnifies the enormity of the killing; it does not imply any prophet could deserve execution, since none did an act requiring it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: بغير الحق attaches to وتقتلون and is either a circumstantial phrase or a qualifier of an omitted verbal noun; both analyses are emphatic. SAMIN-DURR: Another explanation treats بغير الحق as a description of the killing's injustice to the prophets, intensifying the condemnation of the crime. ELMALILI: The added phrase “without right” emphasizes the heinousness and deliberate character of killing prophets, since it plainly violated divine judgment; it also alludes to their hostile intent against the Seal of the Prophets. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The author reads indefinite ḥaqq in 3:112 as killing the prophets without any right or cause whatsoever, intensifying the condemnation; definite al-ḥaqq in 2:61 refers to the recognized category of right."}, {"id": "2:61/q69/p3", "position": "No valid charge even by their standards", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): The prophets had committed no offense that could warrant their blood or expel them from prophethood; a prophet can never lawfully be killed. KASHSHAF-FULL: Although prophet-killing is inherently unjust, 'without right' means even by their own standards the prophets had committed no offense deserving death; they only advised them. RAZI-FULL: By contrast, the indefinite phrase without any right denies that there was any justification of any kind. NASAFI-FULL: Killing them without right means even by their own standard; the Torah did not warrant their killing, and the phrase is a circumstantial accusative describing wrongful killing. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari asks why the verse adds بغير الحق when prophets could only be killed unlawfully; he answers that the killers themselves had no justifying case against them. BURSEVI: Shuʿayb, Zechariah, and John are named among the prophets they killed; “without right” stresses that even they did not regard the killings as justified. IBNASHUR-FULL: بغير الحق means without a valid ground in their own law; this indicts them by their scripture, although killing prophets can never be justified. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The author reads indefinite ḥaqq in 3:112 as killing the prophets without any right or cause whatsoever, intensifying the condemnation; definite al-ḥaqq in 2:61 refers to the recognized category of right."}, {"id": "2:61/q69/p4", "position": "Known right versus no right at all", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The definite phrase without the right refers to the recognized legal grounds for killing among Muslims, as in the Prophetic report listing three cases in which Muslim blood is lawful. RAZI-FULL: By contrast, the indefinite phrase without any right denies that there was any justification of any kind. BURHAN: The same accusation appears with the definite phrase in al-Baqara and without the article in Al Imran, illustrating variation in definiteness. BURHAN: Al Imran uses indefinite حق in a generic conditional statement; al-Baqara's definite الحق concerns a familiar rationale used by the people being described. ALUSI-FULL: One explanation of “without right” is that they knew the murders were unjust: worldly desire, caprice, and excess drove them; on this reading the definite article points to a known right. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The definite الحق in 2:61 means the known right that could authorize killing; the passage introduces its contrast with indefinite حق in 3:112 without yet explaining that form. SAMARRAI-ASRAR: The author reads indefinite ḥaqq in 3:112 as killing the prophets without any right or cause whatsoever, intensifying the condemnation; definite al-ḥaqq in 2:61 refers to the recognized category of right."}, {"id": "2:61/q69/p5", "position": "Unjust human killing versus God's taking life", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: A third answer distinguishes God's just taking of life from people killing without right, forestalling the objection that God also kills."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q70", "question": "How i
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
