<<chunk 21, part 5 of 0..5>>
ly, the second ذالك may refer to disbelief and killing the prophets, which caused the punishment; persistent small sins lead into greater ones."}, {"id": "2:61/q71/p3", "position": "Sabbath violation is specified", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (كثير من المفسرين): Many exegetes restrict the disobedience and transgression to violating the Sabbath; others take them generally as sins, exceeding God’s commands, and violating His prohibitions. KASHSHAF-FULL (قيل): Another view specifies their transgression as violating the Sabbath. NASAFI-FULL: The repeated that may refer to sins generally, or specifically to Sabbath transgression; alternatively unbelief and killing arose from persistent disobedience and excess that hardened their hearts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another explanation identifies the transgression as their violation of the Sabbath prohibition."}, {"id": "2:61/q71/p4", "position": "Repeated wrongdoing caused their fate", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Their disbelief and killing resulted from the evil consequence of committing sins and transgressing God's command. ALUSI-FULL: The causal باء introduces an interpreted verbal noun; the nominal wording highlights repeated disbelief and killing over time or vividly recalls their ugly acts. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Some listed sins occurred generations after Moses, but the verse recalls them alongside the wilderness complaint to warn Muslims and the Prophet’s Jews against repeating ancestral sins for worldly gain."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q72", "question": "What does transgression mean here?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q72/p1", "position": "Crossing God's limits into wrongdoing", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Transgression is crossing a boundary God set for His servants and passing beyond it. IBNATIYYA-FULL: يعتدون means transgressing limits; transgression applies broadly to crossing boundaries and is conventionally used for injustice and sins. TABRISI: Iʿtidāʾ is crossing the limit God set for His servants, or any limit of one thing into another. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: ʿUdwān is more severe wrongdoing. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj defines transgression as exceeding the proper measure in anything. RAZI-FULL: They transgressed means they acted unjustly, crossing from right into falsehood. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Transgression is crossing God's boundary from what is right into falsehood. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (شاعر): A second poetic line says people may underestimate evil even as it grows. BIQAI-FULL: Their transgression was an ingrained habit that continued and emboldened them to commit grave acts."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q73", "question": "How is the verse read inwardly?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q73/p1", "position": "The request signifies descent into bodily desires", "reasons": "SULAMI (قيل): People fall into two groups: those freed from self-direction and content with God's decree keep increasing, while those left to their own choices remain tossed about until they perish. SULAMI: The rebuke means they exchanged God's primordial choice for them for disobedient asking and desire; God's word does not change. SULAMI (الواسطي): Al-Wasiti says they abandoned manna and quails, which came without effort, for food that suited their appetites and ordinary nature. QASHANI: The Israelites’ one food is spiritual nourishment through knowledge, gnosis, and wisdom. QASHANI: Their request to Moses means asking God to permit the soul’s base desires, low pleasures, stale amusements, and other ego-centered satisfactions. QASHANI: Egypt signifies the city of the body; humiliation is the condition following pursuit of desires and greed for possessions, while misery means lasting need and dwelling in the lower realm. QASHANI: Incurring divine wrath signifies deserving distance from and expulsion by God; their downfall follows from being veiled from His signs and manifestations. QASHANI: On a second inward reading, killing the prophets means attacking the heart’s prophets without a sound warrant, through falsehood, disobedience to heart and intellect, and transgression against their guidance. BURSEVI (التأويلات): The lower self asks its heart, figured as Moses, for bodily produce: animal desires and physical pleasures; the answer is to exchange the perishing for the enduring. BURSEVI (التأويلات): The inward Egypt is the lower body, reached by descending from the high stations of the spirit; its base demands bring beast-like degradation. BURSEVI (التأويلات): Inward disbelief means denying unseen inspirations and spiritual unveilings; killing prophets means nullifying divinely opened reports of the unseen and denying their secrets. BURSEVI (التأويلات): These losses result from disobedience and breaking the covenant of striving in worship; transgression is seeking something other than God. BURSEVI: In the inward reading, the servant has a will, but God’s will is better; “descend” means leaving surrender and divine governance for self-directed choice. BURSEVI: Choosing and planning for oneself alongside God’s governance brings humiliation and poverty. BURSEVI (التأويلات): The inward analogy says Israel could not endure one heavenly food because of low nature, just as the lower human self cannot be content with one spiritual nourishment from God. BURSEVI (النبي عليه السلام): The Prophet says he is unlike others because he spends the night with his Lord, who feeds and gives him drink, modeling the soul’s endurance of spiritual nourishment. ALUSI-FULL: The spiritual lesson is that they refused God's decree, gratitude, and patience; tyranny and abasement took hold, worldly love filled their hearts, and they fell from their high station. ALUSI-FULL: In the mystical reading, the one food is wisdom and knowledge, while earthly growth symbolizes vile desires and low pleasures arising from the base self in the body's Egypt; tasting them brings humiliation, poverty, and ruin. ALUSI-FULL: The mystical cause of this demand is veiling from divine signs, darkening hearts through sin, and heedlessness of the Beloved that replaces the sought goal with other things; the author asks for well-being."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q74", "question": "How do reciters combine variants in this passage?", "turns_on": "Word-by-word Egyptian method versus transmitter-by-transmitter Syrian method.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q74/p1", "position": "Recitation methods vary", "reasons": "NASHR: Combining by word repeats each word with a foundational or word-specific variant, stopping when possible or joining to the last face; for two-word differences, the reader stops after the second word and completes the options."}, {"id": "2:61/q74/p2", "position": "Word by word combination", "reasons": "NASHR: The Egyptian word-by-word method is more reliable for exhausting variants and easier to learn, but it detracts from the flow and beauty of recitation."}, {"id": "2:61/q74/p3", "position": "Each transmitter to a stop", "reasons": "NASHR: The Syrian method reads one transmitter’s face to a permissible stop, then repeats to that stop with the next reader; the author learned both methods and combines them, prioritizing the next reader most compatible with the first and observing good performance."}, {"id": "2:61/q74/p4", "position": "A combined method", "reasons": "NASHR: The Syrian method reads one transmitter’s face to a permissible stop, then repeats to that stop with the next reader; the author learned both methods and combines them, prioritizing the next reader most compatible with the first and observing good performance."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q75", "question": "What larger lesson or link is drawn from the verse?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q75/p1", "position": "The verse warns against ingratitude and recalls Israel's history", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: The history warns this Muslim community against following the People of the Book; the next comprehensive verse begins with the believers among this community before treating the other religious communities. ALUSI-FULL: The episode resembles their earlier resistance after hearing God's speech, followed by their destruction and then the gift of life. IBNASHUR-FULL: Gratitude means displaying a blessing’s intended effects; failing to do so merits its removal and replacement with its opposite. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: To return to their homeland as an independent, honorable society, they needed fidelity to God and Moses, acceptance of his teaching, and willingness to endure material hardship."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
