<<chunk 21, part 2 of 0..5>>
ives nabīʾ from nabaʾ, informing of an unseen matter the reporter could not know unaided. ALUSI-FULL (أبو زيد): Abu Zayd traces نبأت to leaving the earth; the objection may have been to the ambiguity of “expelled by God,” not to the reading itself, and a prophet's use is not automatically permitted for people. QIRAAT-ER: The hamzated nabīʾīn reading derives the word from informing rather than elevation, making the etymological distinction explicit."}, {"id": "2:61/q59/p2", "position": "From elevation or rising", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (some scholars): Some derive nabī and nubuwwa without hamza from nabwa, an elevated place, and say the original sense is a visible, raised road; they report not hearing the word hamzated. ZAJJAJ: “Nabī” may derive from “anbaʾa,” with hamza dropped through frequent use, or from a verb meaning to rise, giving the sense of high rank. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The unhamzated form may derive from nabwa, an elevated place, because the Prophet reports from the exalted realm and conveys God's message. Against — FARISI-HUJJA: He rejects derivation from النباوة, or both proposed roots, because Sibawayh’s diminutive and the agreed forms تنبأ and النبيئة establish hamza as the root consonant. MAWARDI-FULL: A third etymology derives nabī from elevation because prophets hold a high rank. JISHUMI (الكسائي): One etymology derives nabī from nabwa, an elevated place; al-Kisāʾī gives “path” as another derivation, since people are guided by a prophet. BAGHAWI-FULL: Another derivation takes “nabī” to mean elevated, from a high place, with the word retaining its original form. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's evidence that Arabs say nabīʾat suʾ and tanabbaʾa supports the hamzated root and excludes derivation from nabāwa. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's report that all Arabs say tanabbaʾa with hamza supports deriving nabiʾ from the hamzated root and rules out nabāwa. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj allows nabi to derive either from anbaʾa with hamza dropped through frequent use or from nabā, to rise. QURTUBI-FULL: Those omitting hamzah either derive the word from the same root with a softened hamzah or from nabā yanbū, 'to rise'; nabwah is elevation. NASAFI-FULL: Nabī may derive from informing, as one who tells from God, or from rising; nubuwwa is an elevated place. SAMIN-DURR: A second derivation for the non-hamzated form takes it from نبا ينبو, to rise or appear; the Prophet's rank is elevated and his position manifest. SAMIN-DURR: On the نبا derivation, النبي can be an active participle meaning elevated or a passive participle meaning God raised him above creation; its sound changes yield أنبياء. QIRAAT-ER: The hamzated nabīʾīn reading derives the word from informing rather than elevation, making the etymological distinction explicit."}, {"id": "2:61/q59/p3", "position": "From a road or path", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (some scholars): Some derive nabī and nubuwwa without hamza from nabwa, an elevated place, and say the original sense is a visible, raised road; they report not hearing the word hamzated. TAB-FULL (القطامي): Al-Qutami’s line uses nabiyan for a road, cited by the unhamzated etymology as evidence that nabī means a manifest road. THALABI (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī says nabī without hamza means “road”; a messenger is named for guiding people, and a poem uses nabī in this sense. MAWARDI-FULL: A second etymology takes nabī from “path”; the Prophet is called nabī because it is the way to him, supported by al-Qutami's line. JISHUMI (الكسائي): One etymology derives nabī from nabwa, an elevated place; al-Kisāʾī gives “path” as another derivation, since people are guided by a prophet. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Those who do not hamzate differ: some derive nabī from hamza but ease the hamza, while others derive it from naba yanbū, meaning to appear; the prophet guides to the manifest path of guidance and salvation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الزهراوي): Al-Zahrawi records نبوء for 'appeared', making a conspicuous road نبيء with hamza. QURTUBI-FULL: Without hamzah, nabī can mean a path; a messenger is called nabī because people are guided by him as by a road. QURTUBI-FULL (شاعر): An unnamed poet uses nabī for a path on the ground, supporting the unhamzated lexical sense. SAMIN-DURR: A further etymology derives النبي from الطريق, since a prophet is God's path to creation through whom people learn their Creator; the first cited poem uses نبيا to mean a road."}, {"id": "2:61/q59/p4", "position": "From departure or movement", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA (أبو زيد): Abū Zayd explains نبأت from moving from one land to another, but distinguishes this travel verb from the etymology of نبي. FARISI-HUJJA: Al-Fārisī derives نبي from نبأ, news, because a prophet reports from God, rather than from the travel verb. ALUSI-FULL (أبو زيد): Abu Zayd traces نبأت to leaving the earth; the objection may have been to the ambiguity of “expelled by God,” not to the reading itself, and a prophet's use is not automatically permitted for people."}, {"id": "2:61/q59/p5", "position": "The etymology is disputed", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Zuhayr's hamzated reading derives أدنأ from lowliness; the unhamzated form may also have originated with hamza and been softened. ALUSI-FULL (نافع): Nafiʿ reads النبيين with hamza, as he does النبي and النبوة."}, {"id": "2:61/q59/p6", "position": "The stated interpretation", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm bilginleri): One proposed etymology derives nebī from nebve or nebâve, meaning high, noble, or honorable, because prophethood and its revelation bear transcendent superiority. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İkinci görüş): Another proposed etymology derives nebī from nebeʾ, “news,” because a prophet conveys information and knowledge from God to people."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q60", "question": "What is a prophet here?", "turns_on": "The lexical messenger description versus the broader theological definition.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q60/p1", "position": "A prophet conveys God's message", "reasons": "DURR-FULL (الحاكم): Al-Hakim authenticated the report about the Prophet's distinction between nabīʾ and nabī. DURR-FULL (الذهبي): Al-Dhahabi rejects the Abu Dharr report as munkar and unsound. ELMALILI: Nafiʿ reads the word in its original form as nabiyyīn. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: He observes that accounts of the Children of Israel’s sins use the prophets term, contrasting النبيين in al-Baqara with الأنبياء in Āl ʿImrān."}, {"id": "2:61/q60/p2", "position": "The stated interpretation", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm bilginleri): Nearly all Islamic scholars define a prophet as a person chosen from humanity, given superior capacities, and assigned to convey the divine message to a community or all people. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Nebī, plural anbiyā, denotes chosen servants who mediate between God and people by conveying divine commands and prohibitions; Turkish commonly uses the Persian-derived peygamber for both nebī and rasūl."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q61", "question": "How do nabī and rasūl relate?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q61/p1", "position": "The terms overlap, with a reported distinction", "reasons": "ELMALILI: Nabī is broader than rasūl—every rasūl is a nabī but not every nabī is a rasūl—although the Qur'an sometimes uses the terms synonymously. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The etymological disagreement does not amount to a substantive disagreement over the technical definition of prophet; scholars also differ over whether nebī and rasūl mean the same or different things."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q62", "question": "Is prophethood bestowed or acquired?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q62/p1", "position": "Prophethood is God's gift", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm bilginleri): Scholars agree prophethood is a bestowed divine rank, not something acquired through effort; some read the “wisdom” of 2:269 as revelation and cite it as evidence. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Bazı bilginler): Some scholars interpret the wisdom in 2:269 as revelation and use it as evidence that prophethood is divinely bestowed. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: The interpretation of Ibrahim 14:11 and Quranic statements that God sends people as messengers also show that prophethood is bestowed, not earned."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q63", "question": "What does faith in prophets require?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q63/p1", "position": "Faith in prophets is fundamental", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm bilginleri): Faith in prophets is one of Islam’s six articles of faith; scholars who group belief into three fundamentals—divinity, prophethood, and afterlife—hold that denying prophethood removes a believer in God from the religion."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q64", "question": "What traits define prophets?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q64/p1", "position": "Prophets have defining truthful and trustworthy traits", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm bilginleri): Scholars identify five defining prophetic traits: truthfulness, trustworthiness, sinlessness, keen judgment, and complete delivery of the divine message. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Prophets faithfully convey the truth; rare minor slips, called zalla, are corrected by revelation, and their intelligence enables them to understand and explain divine teaching accurately."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q65", "question": "How does prophethood relate to human nature?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q65/p1", "position": "Prophets remain human servants", "reasons": "KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Islam takes a middle course by treating prophets as God’s chosen messengers and servants rather than divine beings, unlike Christian deification of Jesus. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Prophets first believe in the truths they preach and carefully apply religious, moral, and legal rulings in their own lives. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR: Outside their prophetic mission, prophets share ordinary human experiences such as eating, marrying, owning property, illness, and death; attributing extraordinary qualities in these matters is impermissible."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q66", "question": "Why does human
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
