<<chunk 21, part 1 of 0..5>>
erive nabī and nubuwwa without hamza from nabwa, an elevated place, and say the original sense is a visible, raised road; they report not hearing the word hamzated. TAB-FULL (القطامي): Al-Qutami’s line uses nabiyan for a road, cited by the unhamzated etymology as evidence that nabī means a manifest road. ZAJJAJ (أهل المدينة): The agreed reading of “nabiyyīn,” “anbiyāʾ,” and “barīʾa” drops hamza; a group of Medinan readers pronounce hamza in these forms throughout the Qur’an. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The unhamzated form is supported by the heaviness of hamza in Arabic speech; the cited Prophetic wording and Quraysh's non-hamzating illustrate this. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The unhamzated form may derive from nabwa, an elevated place, because the Prophet reports from the exalted realm and conveys God's message. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: Arabic often drops hamza in words whose origins contain it; the author gives النبي، الخابية، البرية، الذرية، and الروية as parallels. FARISI-HUJJA (ورش عن نافع): Warsh reports Nāfiʿ hamzas all forms but drops the second hamza when two meet, whether alike or different, as in the two al-Aḥzāb phrases. FARISI-HUJJA (الباقون): All remaining readers leave hamza out of these forms. THALABI: The famous reading has al-nabiyyīn with shadda and no hamza; Nāfiʿ alone uses hamza and lengthens it. THALABI (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī says nabī without hamza means “road”; a messenger is named for guiding people, and a poem uses nabī in this sense. MAWARDI-FULL: The common reading leaves nabī unhamzated; Nafiʿ alone reads al-anbiyāʾ and al-nabiyyīn with hamza. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيدة): Most Arabs omit the hamza in النبي; he says the Arabs likewise omit it in four words whose original forms contain hamza. JISHUMI (نافع): Nāfiʿ reads nabiyīn andnabiyūn with hamza, restoring the original form; the other readers omit hamza, the lighter and more widespread reading. JISHUMI (رسول الله): A report says a man addressed the Prophet with nabīʾ, with hamza, and he instructed him to say nabī without hamza. IBNATIYYA-FULL (نافع): Nafiʿ hamzates النبيئين wherever it occurs except the two Ahzab passages, 33:50 and 33:53, where he omits lengthening and hamza; the remaining readers omit hamza throughout. IBNATIYYA-FULL (رجل): A report says a man greeted the Prophet as 'Nabīʾ of God' with hamza; the Prophet answered that he was God's prophet without hamza. QURTUBI-FULL (نافع): Nāfiʿ reads al-nabiyyīn with hamzah throughout the Qur'an except two verses in al-Aḥzāb, where he leaves it unlengthened and unhamzated; the other readers omit hamzah throughout. QURTUBI-FULL: The two exceptions to Nāfiʿ's hamzated reading are 33:50 and 33:53, where he reads without lengthening or hamzah because two kasrah hamzahs meet; other readers omit hamzah everywhere. QURTUBI-FULL: Those omitting hamzah either derive the word from the same root with a softened hamzah or from nabā yanbū, 'to rise'; nabwah is elevation. QURTUBI-FULL: Without hamzah, nabī can mean a path; a messenger is called nabī because people are guided by him as by a road. QURTUBI-FULL (شاعر): An unnamed poet uses nabī for a path on the ground, supporting the unhamzated lexical sense. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Zuhayr's hamzated reading derives أدنأ from lowliness; the unhamzated form may also have originated with hamza and been softened. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (نافع): Nafi hamzates forms of نبي; Qalun replaces and assimilates the hamza in two connected readings in al-Ahzab, while most readers omit hamza. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd says nearly all readers, ordinary speakers, and most Arabs omit the hamza, and relates a report in which the Prophet corrects a man who says يا نبيء الله. SAMIN-DURR: Most readers leave the hamza out of النبي and its derivatives; Nafi of Medina pronounces it throughout except two places in al-Ahzab, with Qalun reported to omit it in connected reading there. SAMIN-DURR: For readers without hamza, the preferred account is that they ease an underlying hamza, matching the hamzated reading and forms such as تنبأ مسيلمة. ALUSI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A man addressed the Prophet as نبيء الله with hamza; the Prophet replied that he was نبي الله without hamza."}, {"id": "2:61/q58/p3", "position": "The correction report favors unhamzated address", "reasons": "TABRISI (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report has the Prophet answer a man who called him nabīʾ Allah by saying he is nabī Allah. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو علي): A report where the Prophet rejects nabīʾ with hamzah and accepts nabī without it has a weak chain, according to Abū ʿAlī; the Prophet's uncorrected hearing of a hamzated poem also weakens it. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd says nearly all readers, ordinary speakers, and most Arabs omit the hamza, and relates a report in which the Prophet corrects a man who says يا نبيء الله. DURR-FULL (أبو ذر): Abu Dharr reports that when a Bedouin called the Prophet nabīʾ Allah, he corrected the form and said he was nabī Allah. DURR-FULL (حمران بن أعين): Hamran b. Aʿyan separately reports a Bedouin's address as nabīʾ Allah and the Prophet's correction to nabī Allah."}, {"id": "2:61/q58/p4", "position": "The correction report is weak", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA: Agreement on تنبأ مسيلمة and النبيئة shows that the root has hamza, despite both hamza and weak-letter readings in the transmitted forms. TABRISI: The author suspects some transmitters judged the report's chain weak. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو علي): A report where the Prophet rejects nabīʾ with hamzah and accepts nabī without it has a weak chain, according to Abū ʿAlī; the Prophet's uncorrected hearing of a hamzated poem also weakens it. SAMIN-DURR: The author will not reject Nafi's canonical reading on the basis of a speculative report; if the report is sound, يا نبيء الله may have been stopped because it suggested an expelled person, not because hamza itself was wrong."}, {"id": "2:61/q58/p5", "position": "The two transmitted forms are discussed", "reasons": "IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The ḍamma reading of both letters preserves their original vowels: the pronoun was originally همو before the preposition. SAMIN-DURR (الحاكم): Al-Hakim grades the correction report authentic according to the conditions of the two Ṣaḥīḥ collections, though neither collection includes it. ALUSI-FULL (أبو زيد): Abu Zayd traces نبأت to leaving the earth; the objection may have been to the ambiguity of “expelled by God,” not to the reading itself, and a prophet's use is not automatically permitted for people."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q59", "question": "What is the etymology of nabī?", "turns_on": "Evidence from tanabbaʾa, the plural, poetry, and roots meaning news, elevation, or path.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q59/p1", "position": "From nabaʾ, news", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Nabī is originally hamzated from anbaʾa, ‘to inform’; the form munbiʾ shifted to nabī by changing hamza to yāʾ, like samīʿ and baṣīr from their corresponding forms. ZAJJAJ: “Nabī” may derive from “anbaʾa,” with hamza dropped through frequent use, or from a verb meaning to rise, giving the sense of high rank. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The hamzated form of النبيين derives from informing or announcing, as in the cited expressions about reporting truth and naming the angels. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو زيد): Abū Zayd explains نبأت from moving from one land to another, but distinguishes this travel verb from the etymology of نبي. FARISI-HUJJA: Al-Fārisī derives نبي from نبأ, news, because a prophet reports from God, rather than from the travel verb. FARISI-HUJJA: He rejects derivation from النباوة, or both proposed roots, because Sibawayh’s diminutive and the agreed forms تنبأ and النبيئة establish hamza as the root consonant. FARISI-HUJJA: Agreement on تنبأ مسيلمة and النبيئة shows that the root has hamza, despite both hamza and weak-letter readings in the transmitted forms. THALABI: With hamza, nabīʾ means “informer,” from the Arabic root n-b-ʾ, illustrated by the verse “when she informed him of it.” MAWARDI-FULL: One etymology derives nabī from nabaʾ, report, because a prophet reports from God; the source links this root to the verse about what was reported in Moses' scriptures. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Hamzating derives nabīʾ from anbaʾa, 'to inform': nabīʾ means an informer, like samīʿ meaning one who makes heard; the plural nabāʾ supports the derivation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو علي): Abu Ali cites Sibawayh's نبيئة in a construction with نبوته and the universal use of تنبأ to argue that the root's final radical is hamza. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's evidence that Arabs say nabīʾat suʾ and tanabbaʾa supports the hamzated root and excludes derivation from nabāwa. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's report that all Arabs say tanabbaʾa with hamza supports deriving nabiʾ from the hamzated root and rules out nabāwa. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj allows nabi to derive either from anbaʾa with hamza dropped through frequent use or from nabā, to rise. QURTUBI-FULL: The hamzated form derives from anbaʾa, 'inform': nabīʾ is an active participle, plural anbiyāʾ, with nabāʾ also attested as a plural. QURTUBI-FULL: Those omitting hamzah either derive the word from the same root with a softened hamzah or from nabā yanbū, 'to rise'; nabwah is elevation. NASAFI-FULL: Nabī may derive from informing, as one who tells from God, or from rising; nubuwwa is an elevated place. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda says Arabs replace hamza in النبي، البرية، and الخابية; he adds الذرية from ذرأ, while Sibawayh's تنبأ مسيلمة shows that the hamza is original. SAMIN-DURR: With hamza, النبي derives from نَبَأ (news): it means one who informs about God or one informed by God; its plural نبآء supports this derivation, as in al-Abbas ibn Mirdas's verse. SAMIN-DURR (العباس ابن مرداس): Al-Abbas ibn Mirdas's line uses نبآء with the hamza visible, supporting derivation of النبي from نبأ. SAMIN-DURR: For readers without hamza, the preferred account is that they ease an underlying hamza, matching the hamzated reading and forms such as تنبأ مسيلمة. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali der
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
