<<chunk 21, part 4 of 0..5>>
s the final causal clause parsed?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q70/p1", "position": "Bimā marks cause and the verbs form the causal construction", "reasons": "AKHFASH: In بما عصوا, ما عصوا functions as a noun meaning “their disobedience.” TAB-FULL (أعشى بني ثعلبة): Al-Tabari cites al-Aʿsha’s use of بما as evidence that it expresses the cause or reason for an event. NAHHAS (الأخفش): He interprets بما عصوا as ‘because of their disobedience’; كانوا يعتدون is coordinated with عصوا. WAHIDI-BASIT (الأخفش): He parses ما with the verb as a verbal noun: the disbelief and killing occurred through disobedience, abandonment of commands, and failure to obey. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash interprets bimā as 'because of their disobedience'; disobedience opposes obedience, while transgression exceeds limits, especially in injustice and sins. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: ما in بما عصوا is a verbal noun marker, so the phrase means because of their disobedience. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: اعتداء is not coordinated with عصيان to preserve the verse endings and suggest transgression had become their habitual, continual act. SAMIN-DURR: The final و of عصوا assimilates into the following و because the preceding vowel is fatḥa, with no lengthened vowel to block assimilation; اهتدوا وإن تولوا illustrates the same pattern. SAMIN-DURR: ما is a verbal noun particle and باء is causal, so the clause means because of their disobedience; عصوا is a relative clause with no syntactic case. SAMIN-DURR: عصوا derives from عصيوا: the ياء took fatḥa after a vowel change, then was deleted as the first of two quiescent letters, leaving the pattern فعوا. SAMIN-DURR: كانوا يعتدون is an accusative predicate of كان, and that clause coordinates with the relative clause of ما. SAMIN-DURR: يعتدون originates as يعتديون and undergoes the same deletion and sound change as يتقون, yielding the pattern يفتعون."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q71", "question": "How do disobedience and transgression relate to the earlier offenses and punishment?", "turns_on": "Restated punishment cause versus the earlier sins leading to disbelief and killing.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q71/p1", "position": "Earlier sins led to disbelief and murder", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Tabari explains that the punishment came because of their disobedience, unbelief, and transgression. TAB-FULL: The punishment followed their disobedience to God’s command and crossing the limits into what He prohibited. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatada warns them to avoid disobedience and aggression, the causes of earlier peoples' destruction. WAHIDI-BASIT: Here disbelief and disobedience coincide and each entails the other, though disobedience is not disbelief in every context; alternatively, an omitted noun makes it the ill effect of their disobedience. WAHIDI-BASIT (كثير من المفسرين): Many exegetes restrict the disobedience and transgression to violating the Sabbath; others take them generally as sins, exceeding God’s commands, and violating His prohibitions. BAGHAWI-FULL: Their disobedience means they exceeded God's commands and committed His prohibitions. KASHSHAF-FULL: The demonstrative may point back to disbelief and killing as the result of persistent disobedience and transgression, which hardened hearts until they dared deny signs and kill prophets. KASHSHAF-FULL: Alternatively, it may refer to the disbelief and killing together with their other disobedience. TABRISI: After listing God's favors to the Israelites, the passage recounts their ingratitude and disobedient choice. BAYDAWI-FULL: Minor sins lead to major sins, just as minor acts of obedience lead toward greater acts. NASAFI-FULL: The repeated that may refer to sins generally, or specifically to Sabbath transgression; alternatively unbelief and killing arose from persistent disobedience and excess that hardened their hearts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: من الله may attach to باءوا if باء means return, suggesting they turned away from God through disobedience; alternatively it adjectivally describes غضب, the clearer analysis with the meanings deserve or settle. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Prior disobedience and transgression emboldened them to reject signs and kill prophets, since sins pave the way to disbelief. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The cited verses describe deeds darkening hearts and connect the claim that hearts are veiled to God's curse and their disbelief. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another interpretation maps disobedience to breaking the covenant and transgression to killing many prophets. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): Another gloss describes transgression as long-lasting disobedience and persistence in it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: The poet's lines illustrate how small beginnings can stir great consequences, fitting the claim that earlier disobedience grew into disbelief and murder. SAMIN-DURR: عصيان originally denotes firmness, while اعتداء is تجاوز derived from عدا يعدو; the verse leaves both verbs' objects unstated to include every form of disobedience and transgression. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Disobedience means doing what is forbidden; transgression means exceeding the limits of what is permitted or commanded, and this is an additional cause of their punishment. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says anger falls on one who defies the Majestic through disobedience, so the text next states their deeds. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says prohibitions imply that people may violate them and commands that they may obey, since commands and bans display the distinction between the obedient and disobedient rather than compel what nature already does. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says their disobedience brought the humiliation God announced, and that corrupting the God-created bodies of human beings is an especially grave form of corruption. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines disobedience as violating a command. BURSEVI: Repeated minor sins lead to major sins, just as persistence in small acts of obedience leads toward greater acts. ALUSI-FULL: The following phrase gives the cause behind their disbelief and killings: earlier disobedience and transgression lead one sin to another, with the first cause emphasized because it might seem unexpected. ELMALILI: They made rebellion habitual and continually exceeded limits; persistence in lesser sins leads to major sins, persistence in major sins to disbelief, which enables every atrocity. IBNASHUR-FULL (الفخر): Al-Fakhr holds that requesting another blessing for a known purpose is not itself disobedience. IBNASHUR-FULL: The author rejects the sin-and-pardon interpretation as weak: ‘go down’ grants no favor, and the request gives no evidence of sin, since asking to move from one favor to another for a familiar purpose is not disobedience. IBNASHUR-FULL: The second ذالك may repeat the first reference to punishment, adding disobedience and transgression as further causes; repetition can serve instead of conjunction. IBNASHUR-FULL: Alternatively, the second ذالك may refer to disbelief and killing the prophets, which caused the punishment; persistent small sins lead into greater ones. ASAD-NOTES: The auxiliary kanu signals continuity or repeated persistence in their wrongdoing."}, {"id": "2:61/q71/p2", "position": "Their sins caused punishment", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Tabari explains that the punishment came because of their disobedience, unbelief, and transgression. TAB-FULL: The punishment followed their disobedience to God’s command and crossing the limits into what He prohibited. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Qatada warns them to avoid disobedience and aggression, the causes of earlier peoples' destruction. THALABI: “That was because they disobeyed and transgressed” means they went beyond God’s command and committed His prohibitions. THALABI: Without hamza, the word may reflect deletion of hamza for ease because it is frequent, or mean elevated, from nabūʾa, as in the cited line about a side lifted from the bed. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the name is declined because it is masculine and was given to a masculine place-name, like other short names. TABRISI: Nabi derives from nabaʾ, news, because a prophet reports from God. TABRISI (المازني): Al-Mazini challenges al-Farra's claim that deletion is poetic necessity because the line could instead say fa-lyadun minni. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya argues the report is weak because the Prophet did not object when al-Abbas recited يا خاتم النبآء, and the singular should not differ from the plural. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Because their request came from arrogance and excess rather than need, they were not granted it. IBNKATHIR-FULL: Disobedience means doing what is forbidden; transgression means exceeding the limits of what is permitted or commanded, and this is an additional cause of their punishment. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says anger falls on one who defies the Majestic through disobedience, so the text next states their deeds. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali says their disobedience brought the humiliation God announced, and that corrupting the God-created bodies of human beings is an especially grave form of corruption. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Harali defines transgression as deliberately crossing a limit without excuse, because the person had been given latitude and the boundary was set. ALUSI-FULL (الرازي): Al-Razi argues that the request could not be sinful because God answered it, since answering a sinful request would itself be sinful and prophets cannot do that. ALUSI-FULL: The following phrase gives the cause behind their disbelief and killings: earlier disobedience and transgression lead one sin to another, with the first cause emphasized because it might seem unexpected. IBNASHUR-FULL: The emphatic إن treats them as doubters because their request is long delayed and their longing makes them suspect they may not obtain it. IBNASHUR-FULL: The second ذالك may repeat the first reference to punishment, adding disobedience and transgression as further causes; repetition can serve instead of conjunction. IBNASHUR-FULL: Alternative
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
