<<chunk 21, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:61/q58", "question": "How is nabī and its plural read?", "turns_on": "Nāfiʿ's transmission, hamza ease, the al-Aḥzāb exceptions, and the disputed correction report.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q58/p1", "position": "Hamzated nabīʾ", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari notes an Arabic form without hamza and a hamzated form in which people say dāniʾ for mean or vile. TAB-FULL (الأعشى): A line by al-Aʿshā uses hamzated dāniʾ, evidence for the hamzated Arabic form. TAB-FULL: Nabī is originally hamzated from anbaʾa, ‘to inform’; the form munbiʾ shifted to nabī by changing hamza to yāʾ, like samīʿ and baṣīr from their corresponding forms. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari cites Abbas ibn Mirdas’s line, whose form khatim al-naba supports a hamzated singular nabi. TAB-FULL (some scholars): Some derive nabī and nubuwwa without hamza from nabwa, an elevated place, and say the original sense is a visible, raised road; they report not hearing the word hamzated. TAB-FULL (القطامي): Al-Qutami’s line uses nabiyan for a road, cited by the unhamzated etymology as evidence that nabī means a manifest road. ZAJJAJ (أهل المدينة): The agreed reading of “nabiyyīn,” “anbiyāʾ,” and “barīʾa” drops hamza; a group of Medinan readers pronounce hamza in these forms throughout the Qur’an. ZAJJAJ: “Nabī” may derive from “anbaʾa,” with hamza dropped through frequent use, or from a verb meaning to rise, giving the sense of high rank. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The hamzated form of النبيين derives from informing or announcing, as in the cited expressions about reporting truth and naming the angels. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The unhamzated form is supported by the heaviness of hamza in Arabic speech; the cited Prophetic wording and Quraysh's non-hamzating illustrate this. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The unhamzated form may derive from nabwa, an elevated place, because the Prophet reports from the exalted realm and conveys God's message. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: Arabic often drops hamza in words whose origins contain it; the author gives النبي، الخابية، البرية، الذرية، and الروية as parallels. FARISI-HUJJA (المسيبي وقالون): Al-Musayyibī and Qālūn report that Nāfiʿ hamzas النبيّ forms throughout the Qurʾān except al-Aḥzāb 50 and 53, where adjacent same-type kasra hamzas meet. FARISI-HUJJA (ورش عن نافع): Warsh reports Nāfiʿ hamzas all forms but drops the second hamza when two meet, whether alike or different, as in the two al-Aḥzāb phrases. FARISI-HUJJA (الباقون): All remaining readers leave hamza out of these forms. FARISI-HUJJA: He rejects derivation from النباوة, or both proposed roots, because Sibawayh’s diminutive and the agreed forms تنبأ and النبيئة establish hamza as the root consonant. FARISI-HUJJA: Agreement on تنبأ مسيلمة and النبيئة shows that the root has hamza, despite both hamza and weak-letter readings in the transmitted forms. THALABI: The famous reading has al-nabiyyīn with shadda and no hamza; Nāfiʿ alone uses hamza and lengthens it. THALABI: With hamza, nabīʾ means “informer,” from the Arabic root n-b-ʾ, illustrated by the verse “when she informed him of it.” THALABI (الكسائي): Al-Kisāʾī says nabī without hamza means “road”; a messenger is named for guiding people, and a poem uses nabī in this sense. MAWARDI-FULL: The common reading leaves nabī unhamzated; Nafiʿ alone reads al-anbiyāʾ and al-nabiyyīn with hamza. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيدة): Most Arabs omit the hamza in النبي; he says the Arabs likewise omit it in four words whose original forms contain hamza. JISHUMI (نافع): Nāfiʿ reads nabiyīn andnabiyūn with hamza, restoring the original form; the other readers omit hamza, the lighter and more widespread reading. JISHUMI (رسول الله): A report says a man addressed the Prophet with nabīʾ, with hamza, and he instructed him to say nabī without hamza. BAGHAWI-FULL (نافع): Nafiʿ alone pronounces the hamza in “nabī” and its related forms, giving the sense of one who announces. IBNATIYYA-FULL (نافع): Nafiʿ hamzates النبيئين wherever it occurs except the two Ahzab passages, 33:50 and 33:53, where he omits lengthening and hamza; the remaining readers omit hamza throughout. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Hamzating derives nabīʾ from anbaʾa, 'to inform': nabīʾ means an informer, like samīʿ meaning one who makes heard; the plural nabāʾ supports the derivation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الشاعر): A poetic line addressed to the Seal of the Prophets uses النبآء as a plural form supporting the hamzated derivation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو علي): Abu Ali cites Sibawayh's نبيئة in a construction with نبوته and the universal use of تنبأ to argue that the root's final radical is hamza. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Those who do not hamzate differ: some derive nabī from hamza but ease the hamza, while others derive it from naba yanbū, meaning to appear; the prophet guides to the manifest path of guidance and salvation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الزهراوي): Al-Zahrawi records نبوء for 'appeared', making a conspicuous road نبيء with hamza. IBNATIYYA-FULL (رجل): A report says a man greeted the Prophet as 'Nabīʾ of God' with hamza; the Prophet answered that he was God's prophet without hamza. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's evidence that Arabs say nabīʾat suʾ and tanabbaʾa supports the hamzated root and excludes derivation from nabāwa. TABRISI: As evidence against rejecting hamza, the author says a poet praised the Prophet with the plural and no known objection; a fault in the singular would also affect the plural. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sibawayh's report that all Arabs say tanabbaʾa with hamza supports deriving nabiʾ from the hamzated root and rules out nabāwa. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj allows nabi to derive either from anbaʾa with hamza dropped through frequent use or from nabā, to rise. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Nāfiʿ uses hamza in nabiyyīn and related forms except in two places in al-Aḥzāb, where two successive same-kind kasra hamzas meet. QURTUBI-FULL (نافع): Nāfiʿ reads al-nabiyyīn with hamzah throughout the Qur'an except two verses in al-Aḥzāb, where he leaves it unlengthened and unhamzated; the other readers omit hamzah throughout. QURTUBI-FULL: The two exceptions to Nāfiʿ's hamzated reading are 33:50 and 33:53, where he reads without lengthening or hamzah because two kasrah hamzahs meet; other readers omit hamzah everywhere. QURTUBI-FULL: The hamzated form derives from anbaʾa, 'inform': nabīʾ is an active participle, plural anbiyāʾ, with nabāʾ also attested as a plural. QURTUBI-FULL (العباس بن مرداس): Al-ʿAbbās b. Mirdās's praise of the Prophet as the seal of nabāʾ supports the hamzated form. QURTUBI-FULL: Those omitting hamzah either derive the word from the same root with a softened hamzah or from nabā yanbū, 'to rise'; nabwah is elevation. QURTUBI-FULL: Without hamzah, nabī can mean a path; a messenger is called nabī because people are guided by him as by a road. QURTUBI-FULL (شاعر): An unnamed poet uses nabī for a path on the ground, supporting the unhamzated lexical sense. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو علي): A report where the Prophet rejects nabīʾ with hamzah and accepts nabī without it has a weak chain, according to Abū ʿAlī; the Prophet's uncorrected hearing of a hamzated poem also weakens it. NASAFI-FULL (نافع): Nafi' pronounces the word for prophets with a hamza, as in its related forms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL: Zuhayr's hamzated reading derives أدنأ from lowliness; the unhamzated form may also have originated with hamza and been softened. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (نافع): Nafi hamzates forms of نبي; Qalun replaces and assimilates the hamza in two connected readings in al-Ahzab, while most readers omit hamza. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd says nearly all readers, ordinary speakers, and most Arabs omit the hamza, and relates a report in which the Prophet corrects a man who says يا نبيء الله. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda says Arabs replace hamza in النبي، البرية، and الخابية; he adds الذرية from ذرأ, while Sibawayh's تنبأ مسيلمة shows that the hamza is original. SAMIN-DURR: The author will not reject Nafi's canonical reading on the basis of a speculative report; if the report is sound, يا نبيء الله may have been stopped because it suggested an expelled person, not because hamza itself was wrong. SAMIN-DURR: Most readers leave the hamza out of النبي and its derivatives; Nafi of Medina pronounces it throughout except two places in al-Ahzab, with Qalun reported to omit it in connected reading there. SAMIN-DURR: With hamza, النبي derives from نَبَأ (news): it means one who informs about God or one informed by God; its plural نبآء supports this derivation, as in al-Abbas ibn Mirdas's verse. SAMIN-DURR (العباس ابن مرداس): Al-Abbas ibn Mirdas's line uses نبآء with the hamza visible, supporting derivation of النبي from نبأ. SAMIN-DURR (أبو علي): Abu Ali cites Sibawayh calling the verified pronunciation of نبيا and برية poor, since the usual Arabic practice is to ease the hamza. SAMIN-DURR: For readers without hamza, the preferred account is that they ease an underlying hamza, matching the hamzated reading and forms such as تنبأ مسيلمة. SAMIN-DURR: A second derivation for the non-hamzated form takes it from نبا ينبو, to rise or appear; the Prophet's rank is elevated and his position manifest. SAMIN-DURR: Qalun has no reported disagreement at these النبي positions; the hamza remains underlying and is omitted only in connected reading, returning at a pause. DURR-FULL (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar says the Prophet, Abu Bakr, Umar, and the caliphs did not use the hamza in nabī; he calls hamza a later innovation. ALUSI-FULL (نافع): Nafiʿ reads النبيين with hamza, as he does النبي and النبوة. ALUSI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A man addressed the Prophet as نبيء الله with hamza; the Prophet replied that he was نبي الله without hamza. QIRAAT-ER: The hamzated nabīʾīn reading derives the word from informing rather than elevation, making the etymological distinction explicit."}, {"id": "2:61/q58/p2", "position": "Unhamzated nabī", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari notes an Arabic form without hamza and a hamzated form in which people say dāniʾ for mean or vile. TAB-FULL (some scholars): Some d
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
