<<chunk 22, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:61/q76", "question": "What wilderness narrative does Biqāʿī quote from the Torah?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q76/p1", "position": "Biqāʿī quotes a continuous departure and wilderness account", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL: The Qur'anic sequence of Israel's stories is not chronological; the author says the Torah's important correspondences explain its arrangement. BIQAI-FULL: The author says he consulted a current ninth-century Jewish copy of the Torah's fourth book, in an Arabic translation marked with reading times, and compared it with the meaning alongside a Jewish reader. BIQAI-FULL: The Torah itinerary places Israel's departure from Rameses, also called Ain Shams in a variant, on the fifteenth of Nisan after Passover, with a variant dating it one day after Passover; Egyptians were burying their firstborn as Israel left armed. BIQAI-FULL: The cited Torah says Egypt was occupied with burying its slain firstborn and that the Lord had taken vengeance on the Egyptians' gods as Israel departed. BIQAI-FULL: The Torah itinerary continues along the Red Sea coast, with variant names for the sea and several wilderness encampments through Rithmah. BIQAI-FULL: At Rephidim there was no drinking water; the itinerary gives a variant name for the station. BIQAI-FULL (موسى): Moses commands Israel to remember its liberation from Egyptian slavery through the annual festival of unleavened bread, observed for seven days, and to teach its meaning to their children. BIQAI-FULL (موسى): Moses says the observance is a sign and memorial because God brought Israel out with a mighty hand, and it should be kept year after year. BIQAI-FULL (موسى): The Torah passage commands consecrating every firstborn male animal to God, redeeming it with a lamb or slaughtering it, and redeeming each firstborn son. BIQAI-FULL (موسى): When a child asks why the rite is performed, the parent is to recount that God brought Israel out of bondage and killed Egypt's firstborn, explaining the sacrifice and redemption of Israel's own firstborn. BIQAI-FULL: The Torah says God avoided the nearby Palestine road lest Israel see battle and flee back to Egypt, leading them through the Sea of Reeds wilderness instead. BIQAI-FULL: Israel left armed, while Moses carried Joseph's bones because Joseph had made Israel swear to take them when God remembered and brought them out. BIQAI-FULL: God led them by a cloud pillar in daylightand a fire pillar at night for shade and light, and neither pillar left the people. BIQAI-FULL (الرب): God tells Moses to camp by the sea so Pharaoh will think Israel is lost, then says He will harden Pharaoh's heart, gain glory through him and his army, and teach Egypt that He is Lord. BIQAI-FULL: Pharaoh regrets releasing Israel and pursues with six hundred thousand chosen riders and Egyptian forces; Israel sees the pursuers and panics. BIQAI-FULL (بنو إسرائيل): Israel cries to Moses that Egypt had enough graves and that slavery there would have been better than dying in the wilderness. BIQAI-FULL (موسى): Moses tells the people not to fear: they will witness God's deliverance, will not see the Egyptians again, and God will fight for them while they remain calm. BIQAI-FULL (الرب): God tells Moses to command Israel to move and to lift and strike the sea so the people can cross dry; He will harden Egypt and gain glory through Pharaoh's forces. BIQAI-FULL: The divine pillar moves behind Israel between their camp and Egypt's, with darkness for the Egyptians and light for Israel, preventing approach throughout the night. BIQAI-FULL: The Lord drives the sea back with a hot wind all night, leaving dry ground and walls of water on both sides as Israel crosses. BIQAI-FULL: Egypt's chariots and horses pursue Israel into the sea; at dawn God terrifies the army and disables its chariots, prompting the Egyptians to recognize that the Lord fights for Israel. BIQAI-FULL (الرب): God commands Moses to stretch his hand over the sea; the waters return and drown Pharaoh's forces, with no survivor. BIQAI-FULL: Israel is saved, sees the dead Egyptians and God's great act against them, then fears God and believes and trusts the words of Moses. BIQAI-FULL (موسى وبنو إسرائيل): Moses and Israel sing praise to God as the glorious, eternal warrior who drowned Pharaoh's army; their song describes divine power, rescue, and kingship forever. BIQAI-FULL: The song says surrounding peoples trembled, Israel was led toward the sacred mountain, and God would reign forever; afterward they traveled three days through Shur without water and grumbled at bitter Marah. BIQAI-FULL: God promised evening meat and morning bread so Israel would know that he was their Lord. BIQAI-FULL: Quail covered the camp at evening, and morning dew surrounded it before manna appeared. BIQAI-FULL: The manna appeared as flaky material on the ground, resembling frost. BIQAI-FULL: Moses identified the manna as God's bread and instructed each person to gather one measure according to need for every member of the household. BIQAI-FULL: Although some gathered much and others little, the measured amounts left no surplus for the first or shortage for the latter. BIQAI-FULL: They reached the wilderness of Sin between Elim and Sinai on the fifteenth day of the second month after leaving Egypt. BIQAI-FULL: The Israelites grumbled against Moses and Aaron, longing for Egypt's meat and bread and accusing them of bringing the people into the wilderness to die of hunger. BIQAI-FULL: God promised bread from heaven and daily gathering as a test of whether Israel would keep his commands. BIQAI-FULL: God commanded a double collection on the sixth day. BIQAI-FULL: Moses and Aaron told the people that God had brought them from Egypt and that they would see his glory the next morning; their complaint had reached him. BIQAI-FULL: Moses said God would give meat in the evening and bread in the morning, and that the people's complaint was against God rather than his messengers. BIQAI-FULL: Aaron brought the congregation near; God's glory appeared in a cloud, and God said he had heard their grumbling. BIQAI-FULL: Some disobeyed Moses by keeping manna overnight; it became wormy and foul, angering Moses. BIQAI-FULL: The measure is glossed as ten jarīb, that is, ten waybas. BIQAI-FULL: Manna was gathered each morning and melted when the sun grew hot. BIQAI-FULL: On the sixth day each person gathered two measures; Moses explained that the next day was a holy Sabbath of rest. BIQAI-FULL: The people were to bake and cook what they needed and keep the remainder cold for the following day. BIQAI-FULL: The saved manna did not spoil; Moses said to eat it on the Sabbath, when none could be gathered in the field, and to gather on the other six days. BIQAI-FULL: Some went out to gather on the seventh day but found none; God rebuked their refusal to accept his commands, and the people rested. BIQAI-FULL: Israel called the food manna; it resembled a coriander seed and tasted like honey. BIQAI-FULL: The fourth book describes manna as coriander-like and white like the mahā, then ground, pounded, cooked into a dish, and tasting like oil-kneaded bread. BIQAI-FULL: Israel ate manna for forty years, until reaching inhabited territory and Canaan. BIQAI-FULL: Al-Biqāʿī cites the Torah's wilderness account: the tabernacle was Israel's qibla, with cloud and night fire signaling when to camp or travel and shading them from the sun. BIQAI-FULL: This segment completes the wilderness narrative: silver horns summoned Israel to the meeting tent and called commanders with one blast; the ark went ahead and the cloud shaded travelers from the sun. BIQAI-FULL: When the people grumbled, fire from God burned the camp's outskirts; Moses prayed and it subsided, so the place was named Burning. BIQAI-FULL: A mixed crowd craved meat and recalled Egypt's fish, cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic; they complained that only manna remained to eat. BIQAI-FULL: Moses said he could not carry the whole nation alone and asked God to kill him rather than let him see further harm. BIQAI-FULL: God appointed seventy elders and shared Moses' spirit with them; a wind brought quail, then a severe plague struck the people while they ate, naming the site Graves of Lust. BIQAI-FULL: After the quail plague, the people left Graves of Lust, reached Hazeroth, and remained there seven days."}]}
{"id": "2:61/q77", "question": "What inimitability arguments cite this verse's wording?", "turns_on": "Competing theories of inimitability and objections using this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "2:61/q77/p1", "position": "Verbal variety is disputed evidence", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL: The passage lists apparent differences in Qur'anic statements, including denial that people will ask one another alongside a later description of them asking, and two formulations limiting what prevents belief. ALUSI-FULL: Examples of verbal variation include wool described once as ṣūf and once as ʿihn, and the ordering of poverty and humiliation in the cited phrase. ALUSI-FULL: Further alleged inconsistencies include calling the Prophet a father, varying the material from which Adam was created, repetitions in wording and meaning, and explaining that three plus seven days equals ten complete. ALUSI-FULL (عثمان): Uthman is reported to have said that the Qur'an contains grammatical irregularities that the Arabs will set right with their tongues."}, {"id": "2:61/q77/p2", "position": "The proposed criterion is challenged", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (قيل): An objection argues that even freedom from all such defects would not establish inimitability, since sermons and poetry show the same feature and the claim scales to short surahs. ALUSI-FULL: The author objects that the diversion theory makes the miracle the act of diversion rather than the Qur'an itself, contrary to the Muslims' prior consensus."}, {"id": "2:61/q77/p3", "position": "Divine diversion from rivalry", "reasons": "Against — ALUSI-FULL: He
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
