<<chunk 24, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:180/q06", "question": "How do إِذَا and إِن تَرَكَ work in the sentence?", "turns_on": "what governs the time clause and how each conditional receives an answer", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q06/p1", "position": "A conditional result marker fā is understood", "reasons": "Al-Akhfash, reported by al-Naḥḥās and Ibn ʿAṭiyya, supplies fa before al-waṣiyya and cites poetry; later grammarians contest its applicability outside poetic necessity. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أصحاب الشافعي: Al-Shafi'i's students divide between Malik's permissive view and Abu Hanifa's prohibition. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو الحسن الأخفش: Al-Akhfash analyzes the conditional answer as “then the bequest,” with the result marker fa omitted. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · عائشة: Aisha told a man with 3,000 dirhams and four dependents that this was little and should be left to his family. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · عائشة: ʿĀʾisha considered four hundred dinars no surplus for a man with dependents; for a family of four and three thousand, she likewise called it little and advised leaving it to the children. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya lets an implied الإيصاء govern إذا and makes الوصية a مبتدأ; the implicit answer is like فعليه الوصية with a deleted فاء. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · سيبويه: Ibn Atiyya invokes Sibawayh's conditional verse example, من يفعل الصالحات الله يحفظه, with the answer's فاء omitted. BURHAN, d. 794 · الأخفش: Al-Akhfash reads an implicit fa before “the bequest,” making 2:180 an instance of a condition interposed on another condition. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · عائشة: A man with three thousand dirhams and four dependents asked Aisha about bequeathing; she called it little and advised leaving it to his family. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The fā in the inheritance passage signals that the earlier bequest scheme caused the transfer to inheritance. | mentions 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The discussion reinforces kinship duties with Qurʾanic commands to maintain family ties and give relatives their due. | mentions 4:1, 16:90 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: It is uncertain rather than certain that children and distant non-heir relatives fall within the general meaning of al-aqrabīn. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Unlike retaliation and bequests, which accord with natural impulses and need no preface, fasting deprives people of food, drink, and sex, so it needs preparatory explanation. | mentions 2:178, 2:180 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: An orphaned grandchild whose father died before the grandfather can be excluded because the living paternal uncle is nearer; Islamic law has no rule making the child inherit in the father’s place. Against: ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Ibn ʿAṭiyya misquotes Sibawayh's supporting verse; Sibawayh actually cites the line beginning whoever does good deeds, God rewards them, and says this construction is only poetic necessity. Against: SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · الأخفش: A third parse makes الوصية a مبتدأ with omitted predicate فعليه; the author says al-Akhfash's permission to drop فاء جواب is refuted by Sibawayh's transmission. Against: ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الخليل: Khalil rejects dropping the fā from a nominal conditional answer outside poetic necessity."}, {"id": "2:180/q06/p2", "position": "The conditional wording places the duty when death approaches", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مالك: If heirs refuse a bequest to an heir conditional on their approval, Malik returns it to them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الشافعي وأبو حنيفة ومعمر: Al-Shafi'i, Abu Hanifa, and Ma'mar say a refused conditional bequest goes to charitable use. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · شاعرهم: An unnamed poetic line exemplifies omission of the fa from a conditional result. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو الحسن الأخفش: An alternative makes the past-tense conditional answer precede or follow it: bequest to parents and relatives if he leaves wealth. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: The conditional time expression depends on the meaning of kutiba, not on al-waṣiyya, which follows it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The answers to the two conditions are omitted. The sense is that the will was prescribed for a person when death's signs arrive and, if he has wealth, he should make a will; kataba cannot itself answer because it is past while the conditions are prospective. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Some grammarians make al-waṣiyya a subject in a conditional answer, with an omitted fa or an implied predicate such as it is due; the passive subject would be an implicit yuktabu explained by the wording that follows. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · سيبويه عن الخليل: Sibawayh transmits al-Khalil's ruling that a conditional clause without fa, such as if you come to me, I am generous, occurs only when a poet is forced; al-Akhfash's implied-fa analysis is refuted by this evidence. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · سيبويه: Sibawayh permits deleting فاء جواب only by poetic necessity, citing a line where الله يشكرها follows the conditional. BURHAN, d. 794 · author: For the conditional construction under discussion, the answer is the two clauses together; it does not exist before the condition, even if one clause alone does. BURHAN, d. 794 · author: On one grammatical view, the conditional reply in إن ترك خيرا الوصية has an elided فاء: فالوصية. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The semantic content of “was prescribed” governs the conditional; the prescription does not first occur at death, but its application to the person begins then. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Another parse makes “the bequest for parents” a nominal conditional answer with an implicit fā; Khalil rejects its omission except in poetic necessity. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: “Was written” can govern “when”; the time phrase limits when the obligation arises while evoking its eternal inscription. STUDYQURAN · author: One interpretation makes the bequest conditional on leaving property, so it is not universally obligatory; debts and other financial obligations are paid first, and the clause can mean should one desire a bequest."}, {"id": "2:180/q06/p3", "position": "The two conditional answers are omitted and inferred", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عنترة: Antarah calls death obedient to his hand, another poetic instance of personifying death as present. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: The alternative syntax is illustrated by two poetic lines about God rewarding good deeds and requiting evil. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The second condition has an omitted answer indicated by the first omitted answer, so the omitted answer in turn indicates another omission; the author calls the combined conditional structure one of the hardest syntax problems and refers readers to al-Takmil. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · المبرد: Al-Mubarrad reportedly forbids deleting فاء even in poetry and transmits فالرحمن يشكره; others say this does not refute Sibawayh's transmitted wording. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The preferred parse estimates إن ترك خيرا فليوص; that omitted answer also indicates the answer to إذا, better than making one condition answer another or reinterpreting كتب. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya reads كتب as expressing God's binding decree, written from eternity; الوصية is نائب الفاعل, and both conditional answers are omitted but indicated by كتب. BURHAN, d. 794 · author: If “the bequest” is nominative as the subject of “was prescribed,” the construction instead resembles earlier cases with two omitted answers. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: One parse makes “the bequest” the subject of “was written”; the condition’s omitted answer is supplied by “was written for you.” ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · بعض المحققين: Some investigators treat both clauses as conditions with omitted answers: if death comes, let him bequeath if he leaves property; the second condition qualifies the first. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · بعض المحققين: These investigators praise the parse for stating the rule generally, then detailing the required bequest parenthetically. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: If any possession counted, the condition would add little, since nearly everyone leaves at least food or clothing. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · الصادق عليه السلام: Asked whether a bequest may be made to an heir, al-Sadiq answered yes and recited this verse; reported by Muhammad ibn Muslim in al-Kafi, al-Tahdhib, and al-Ayyashi’s tafsir. Against: ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Ibn ʿAṭiyya's parse cannot take the earlier spoken kataba as an omitted answer indicated by what precedes; that would make the estimated answer identical to the already uttered word. The apparent parse makes al-waṣiyya the passive subject of kataba. Against: ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi cautions that the parse requires so many deletions that they weaken its advantages."}, {"id": "2:180/q06/p4", "position": "The temporal phrase is governed by kutiba", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAṭiyya and Jishumī describe this parse, with the duty applying as death approaches; Ibn ʿAṭiyya supplies both conditional answers from the preceding command. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: The temporal clause may be governed by kataba, meaning God's obligation takes effect when death approaches and is eternally written. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another parse treats both answers as omitted, understands kataba as future-directed obligation, and makes idha a temporal adverb governed by kataba; the answer to if he leaves wealth is then also omitted and signaled by kataba. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The author makes كتب govern إذا as a purely temporal adverb, not a condition: the prescription applies at death's arrival. Against: ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Abū Ḥayyān again finds Ibn ʿAṭiyya's analysis inconsistent: if idha is governed as a temporal adverb it is not a condition, and an omitted passive subject or unspoken verbal noun cannot serve as the proposed governor under the stated Basran rules. Against: SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The author finds Ibn Atiyya inconsistent: إذا governed by كتب is temporal, wh
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
