<<chunk 24, part 4 of 0..5>>
āzī transmits ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Zayd from his father."}, {"id": "2:180/q14/p4", "position": "Relatives other than the parents", "reasons": "Rāzī reports Ibn ʿAbbās and Mujāhid."}, {"id": "2:180/q14/p5", "position": "All kin, inheriting or not", "reasons": "Rāzī associates this reading with the original general duty."}, {"id": "2:180/q14/p6", "position": "All close kin", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Al-aqrabīn is the plural of al-aqrab, an elative meaning nearest; its apparent scope includes every relative closer to the deceased, with parents named first and then included again for emphasis and special care."}]}
{"id": "2:180/q15", "question": "What does بِٱلْمَعْرُوفِ require?", "turns_on": "whether fairness specifies the amount, recipients, or identified property", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q15/p1", "position": "Fair, moderate, and free of harm or injustice", "reasons": "Ibn Qutayba, al-Zajjāj, al-Thaʿlabī, al-Wāḥidī, Jishumī, al-Baghawī, Ibn ʿAṭiyya, and al-Ṭabrisī exclude extravagance, stinginess, bias, harm to heirs, and favoring wealthy over poor kin. Ibn Masʿūd urges priority for those in greatest need. Jishumī and al-Ṭabrisī apply maʿrūf to both amount and recipient selection: a wealthy testator's mere dirham is inadequate, and a distant wealthy cousin should not outrank a needy parent. Rāzī applies maʿrūf both to amount and to choosing recipients by customary graciousness. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مالك والشافعي وأبو حنيفة والأوزاعي وأحمد: These jurists say neglecting needy kin is bad, but bequests to outsiders remain valid for any recipient, rich or poor, close or distant, Muslim or non-Muslim. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جمهور العلماء: The majority restrain a sick person's property; literalists say he is like a healthy person, a view al-Qurtubi rejects. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-maʿrūf means fairness without shortchanging or excess; it was initially left to the testator's judgment before the Prophet set the limit. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Bequests should be just: do not favor the wealthy and do not exceed one-third of the estate. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: A fair bequest neither favors the rich while leaving the poor nor exceeds one-third. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · مالك وأبو حنيفة والشافعي وأحمد: They allow a bequest to an outsider even when relatives are left, whether the recipient is rich or poor and Muslim or non-Muslim; this is also reported from ʿUmar, Ibn ʿAbbas, and ʿAʾisha. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari summarizes fairness as justice: do not leave the poor for the rich and do not exceed one third. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The phrase bi-l-maʿrūf attaches either to al-waṣiyya or to an omitted adjective meaning characterized by fairness, making it a circumstantial phrase. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: One explanation of fairness limits a bequest to one third and says not to favor the rich over the poor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن مسعود: Ibn Masʿud explains fairness as giving first to the neediest relative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another explanation is that the will must contain no injustice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Fairness may mean a moderate amount recognized by people's conscience without harming heirs, since people had sometimes bequeathed all their property. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: بالمعروف may attach to الوصية or be a circumstantial qualifier through an omitted phrase: the bequest is fair, not unjust. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: A proper bequest for relatives must not wrong heirs through extravagance or stinginess. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Many verses and hadiths command kindness and benevolence toward relatives. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · النبي: The author calls the report from Abu Hurayra the best in this subject: a wrongdoer may end a lifetime of good with an unjust bequest and enter Hell, while a lifelong wrongdoer may end with a just will and enter Paradise; Abu Hurayra cites 2:229 against transgressing God's limits. | mentions 2:229 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Bequests to other close relatives must follow recognized fairness, with just distribution according to what people know as equitable. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · الحرالي: Al-Ḥarālī defines maʿrūf as what people’s souls accept without aversion. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · عائشة: Aisha first asked a man who wanted to bequeath how much property he owned. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · قتادة: Qatada urges people to consider needy relatives who do not inherit and bequeath to them equitably. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · عبيد الله بن عبد الله بن معمر: Ubayd Allah ibn Abd Allah ibn Ma'mar says named beneficiaries receive a bequest; if the will says to place it where God commanded, it goes to relatives. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · طاوس: Tawus says a bequest to named people is taken back for needy relatives if those relatives were left out. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The recipients are parents and close relatives, whether or not they inherit. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: A fair bequest should not exceed a third, favor the rich while leaving the poor, or violate justice. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The bequest ruling applied when it served justice and wisdom, then was abrogated by the inheritance verse in Surat al-Nisa; bequests are no longer obligatory and may go to non-heirs, but not heirs. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · ابن عباس ومجاهد: Ibn Abbas and Mujahid explain “good” as property or wealth. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · فخر الإسلام: His second argument treats abrogation as transfer: God first required fair bequests among kin, then fixed shares Himself because testators may misjudge or intend harm. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · علي: A report from Ali warns that dying without a bequest for non-inheriting relatives ends one’s work in disobedience. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The duty protects parenthood and kinship, especially the closest ties, from rupture; Elmalılı reads this wisdom from the lām construction. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Dahhâk: Dahhak says a person who dies without bequeathing to relatives ends his deeds in sin. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: In legal usage, îsâ with lām means transferring ownership after death; with ilā it means delegating posthumous management of property and children’s affairs. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: Abu Muslim’s first interpretation is that the bequest here means God’s inheritance assignment for parents and relatives in 4:11. | mentions 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Cessâs Ebû Bekir Râzî: Cessās says Muslims across generations understood and transmitted many abrogated rulings without doubt, just as they accepted general and specific or clear and ambiguous passages. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: A bequest for parents and near relatives must follow what is recognized as fair, avoiding excess, deficiency, injustice, and harm that causes alienation or disappointment. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Carrying out this fair bequest is an obligatory right upon the God-fearing. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: ‘In a fair manner’ means the customary form of beneficence and kindness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · علي عليه السلام: Ali says that one who dies without bequeathing to non-inheriting relatives has ended his work in disobedience. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · Dahhâk, Tâvûs, Taberî: Under this view, the amount bequeathed is left to customary practice and fairness. STUDYQURAN · Some: Some reconcile the commands by taking the parents and relatives to be people who would not inherit, such as disbelieving parents. STUDYQURAN · Early commentators: Bequests should favor relatives before nonrelatives; early commentators condemned leaving needy relatives to give property to outsiders."}, {"id": "2:180/q15/p2", "position": "A known portion of the property", "reasons": "Al-Māwardī transmits the alternative that the bequest must identify known rather than unknown property. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another interpretation requires that the bequest concern a known portion of the testator's property rather than an unspecified amount."}]}
{"id": "2:180/q16", "question": "What fraction of an estate may be bequeathed?", "turns_on": "the third limit, its purpose, smaller preferred amounts, and cases without heirs", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q16/p1", "position": "One third is the ordinary ceiling", "reasons": "The Prophet's reply to Saʿd permits a third but calls it much and prefers leaving children secure; al-Māwardī, al-Thaʿlabī, al-Baghawī, and later sources cite it. Al-Ḥasan reports Abū Bakr and ʿUmar bequeathing a fifth; ʿAlī, al-Ḥasan, and al-Shaʿbī favor smaller fractions. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet explains the one-third limit as protecting heirs from destitution and begging. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · علي: Ali preferred bequeathing one fifth to one quarter, and one quarter to one third. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جمهور العلماء: The majority prohibit bequeathing more than one third. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Sa'd reports that near death at the Farewell Pilgrimage he asked to give away two thirds and then half; the Prophet limited him to a third and urged leaving heirs secure. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet set the measure as one third, saying one third is much. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: A report says God grants a third of property at death as added good deeds and purification; al-Daraqutni transmits it from Abu Umama through Muadh ibn Jabal. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الحسن والبخاري: Al-Hasan and al-Bukhari hold bequest cannot exceed one third; al-Bukhari cites the command to judge by revelation and the Prophet's ruling. | mentions 5:49 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Knowingly exceeding the Prophet's one-third limit violates his prohibition and is sinful. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الشافعي: Al-Shafi'i reads “one third is much” as meaning it is not a small amount. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Bequests should be just: do not favor the wealthy and do not
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
