<<chunk 24, part 5 of 0..5>>
 exceed one-third of the estate. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: A fair bequest neither favors the rich while leaving the poor nor exceeds one-third. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الحسن وجابر بن زيد وعبد الملك بن يعلى: They permit the third of the estate to remain with the recipient the testator selected. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الحسن وطاووس والضحاك: They limit the operative command to parents and relatives who do not inherit, such as enslaved or non-Muslim kin, and to a bequest of one third or less. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari summarizes fairness as justice: do not leave the poor for the rich and do not exceed one third. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: One explanation of fairness limits a bequest to one third and says not to favor the rich over the poor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another view initially leaves the amount to the testator's judgment, then sets the upper limit at one third, citing the report that one third is much. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says that initially only parents inherited alongside one another, while other relatives received by bequest; the inheritance verse set the parents' shares and preserved a bequest for relatives from one-third of the estate. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Inheritance law is an independent divine obligation for fixed-share heirs and residuaries, replacing the earlier ruling; bequests for non-inheriting relatives remain recommended from one-third, supported by this verse and the Prophet's instruction to keep a written will. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · النبي: When Saʿd, whose only heir was a daughter, asked to bequeath two-thirds or half his wealth, the Prophet refused; he allowed one-third but called it much, saying it is better to leave heirs wealthy than begging. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · النبي: Hanifa bequeathed one hundred camels to an orphan in his care; when his sons complained, the Prophet limited a charitable bequest through stepped amounts from five to forty camels. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the inheritance verse detailed the parents' shares and retained a bequest of up to one third for relatives who did not inherit. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · some müctehidler: Some jurists treat a bequest exceeding one-third as invalid, citing the relevant hadith. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · Hz. Peygamber: When Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas proposed bequeathing all his property, the Prophet told him to limit it to one-third and said leaving relatives wealthy is better than leaving them destitute and begging. STUDYQURAN · Prophet: The Prophet advised limiting a bequest to one third, saying that amount is considerable and heirs should be left free from want rather than destitute. STUDYQURAN · author: Islamic law generally limits bequests to no more than one third of the estate."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p2", "position": "Over one third is valid with heirs' consent", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Most jurists allow an over-third bequest when heirs approve: the cap protects heirs, so their waiver validates it like their gift. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن أبي ليلى وعثمان البتي: They hold that if heirs approve an outsider's bequest above one third during the testator's life, they cannot revoke that approval after death. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · müctehidler çoğunluğu: Most jurists, including Hanafis, consider an over-one-third bequest valid if the heirs consent."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p3", "position": "Bequeathing the whole estate is barred when heirs remain", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Scholars agree a person who dies leaving heirs cannot bequeath the whole estate. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: The Saʿd report shows that a person with heirs should not bequeath all their property."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p4", "position": "A quarter is preferable or practiced", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · معمر عن قتادة: Ma'mar transmits from Qatada that Umar bequeathed one quarter; al-Bukhari also reports this from Ibn Abbas. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas recommends reducing a bequest to a quarter rather than a third, citing the Prophet's statement that one-third is much."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p5", "position": "The third is calculated after debts and before inheritance", "reasons": "Jishumī places the will within one third after debts and before inheritance; excess needs heirs' approval after death."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p6", "position": "Without heirs the whole estate may be bequeathed", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس وأبو عبيدة ومسروق وإسحق ومالك: Ibn Abbas, Abu Ubayda, Masruq, Ishaq, and one report from Malik say the limit does not apply when there are no heirs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: The disagreement turns on whether the public treasury is an heir or only a custodian. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو حنيفة وأصحابه: The Hanafis allow a person with no heirs to bequeath the entire estate."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p7", "position": "One fifth is preferable or practiced", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو بكر الصديق: Abu Bakr is reported to have bequeathed one fifth. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · علي: Ali is reported as setting aside one fifth from Muslim war booty."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p8", "position": "The camel bequest report is doubtful", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: The author doubts that the camel-bequest report is reliably attributable to the Prophet."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p9", "position": "A special right ranges from one sixth to one third", "reasons": "TABATABAI, d. 1402 · الصادق عليه السلام: Al-Sadiq describes a right placed by God in people’s wealth for ‘the possessor of this matter,’ bounded from one-sixth to one-third; al-Saduq also transmits this in al-Faqih."}, {"id": "2:180/q16/p10", "position": "One third remains maximum even with heirs' consent", "reasons": "Against: QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أهل الظاهر: Literalists also forbid bequests over one third even with heir consent; al-Qurtubi rejects this and allows waiver."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
