<<chunk 25, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:180/q17", "question": "What happens if a bequest favors outsiders and omits relatives?", "turns_on": "whether relatives have an enforceable prior claim and what fraction is redirected", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q17/p1", "position": "Relatives have priority over outsiders", "reasons": "Masrūq refuses excessive outsider gifts and urges non-inheriting kin; al-Ḥasan and Ṭāwūs protect needy relatives. Al-Thaʿlabī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya report that a gift omitting needy kin may be redirected. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن المنذر: Ibn al-Mundhir reports consensus that bequests to noninheriting parents and relatives are permissible. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الضحاك: Some say relatives have priority because God names them; al-Dahhak says bequeathing to outsiders ends one's life in disobedience. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أصحاب القول الأول: Those making consent irrevocable argue that the rule protects heirs, so approval removes the obstacle; heirs likewise may approve an over-third bequest to an outsider. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi says the first view, prioritizing relatives, is better. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · مالك وأبو حنيفة والشافعي وأحمد: They allow a bequest to an outsider even when relatives are left, whether the recipient is rich or poor and Muslim or non-Muslim; this is also reported from ʿUmar, Ibn ʿAbbas, and ʿAʾisha. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن المنذر: Ibn al-Mundhir reports a consensus among the scholars known to him that bequests to non-inheriting parents and relatives are permissible. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: One position gives relatives first claim on bequests and bars a bequest to outsiders when relatives are left without one. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الشعبي: When Abu al-ʿAliya left his estate to Banu Hashim despite having been freed by a woman of Riyah, al-Shaʿbi objected that he had no right to do so. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن أبي ليلى وعثمان البتي: They hold that if heirs approve an outsider's bequest above one third during the testator's life, they cannot revoke that approval after death. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The minority infers the obligatory bequest must concern relatives, since bequests to outsiders are unanimously not obligatory; they say the Sunnah reinforces the Qurʾanic duty. STUDYQURAN · Early commentators: Bequests should favor relatives before nonrelatives; early commentators condemned leaving needy relatives to give property to outsiders."}, {"id": "2:180/q17/p2", "position": "The outsider's bequest is redirected to relatives", "reasons": "Ṭāwūs and Jābir b. Zayd redirect it to needy kin; al-Shaʿbī objected to Abū al-ʿĀliya's gift to Banū Hāshim after his emancipation by a Riyāḥ woman. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الحسن: Al-Hasan says a bequest to nonrelatives is redirected to kin, who share even when an outsider was named; without kin, an outsider's bequest does not stand. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الشعبي: When Abu al-Aliyah left his estate to Banu Hashim despite being freed by a woman of Riyah, al-Sha'bi said the bequest was invalid. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · طاوس وجابر بن زيد والحسن وإسحق: Tawus and Jaber ibn Zayd say a bequest to outsiders is void and redirected to kin; al-Hasan and Ishaq similarly agree. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · طاووس وجابر وابن زيد: They say a bequest to non-relatives is redirected to the testator's relatives and the disposition annulled; this is also related from al-Hasan and held by Ishaq ibn Rahawayh. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: In pre-Islamic custom, people bequeathed to distant outsiders for show and prestige while leaving close relatives poor; early Islam redirected those bequests to parents and relatives. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Tâvus: Tawus says that if someone bequeaths to outsiders while leaving relatives out, the bequest is taken from the outsiders and returned to the relatives."}, {"id": "2:180/q17/p3", "position": "Two thirds of the outsider's bequest return to relatives", "reasons": "Al-Ḥasan, Jābir b. Zayd, ʿAbd al-Malik b. Yaʿlā, and Rāzī's Khālid b. Zayd are reported with this division; al-Māwardī's wording also assigns two-thirds to the named legatee, a variant in the transmitted detail. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · الحسن: Al-Hasan says if a bequest to non-relatives is one third, they get one third of it and the other two thirds return to relatives."}, {"id": "2:180/q17/p4", "position": "One third of the outsider's bequest returns to relatives", "reasons": "Al-Ḥasan and Qatāda are reported with one-third of the outsider's bequeathed third returned to kin."}, {"id": "2:180/q17/p5", "position": "The outsider's bequest remains valid", "reasons": "Mālik and other jurists let the deceased's direction stand; neglecting needy kin may still be condemned. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عمر وعائشة وسالم بن عبد الله: Ibn Umar reportedly left four thousand to each of his children's mothers; Aisha left household furnishings to a client, and Salim did similarly. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مالك والشافعي وأبو حنيفة والأوزاعي وأحمد: These jurists say neglecting needy kin is bad, but bequests to outsiders remain valid for any recipient, rich or poor, close or distant, Muslim or non-Muslim. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi suggests Abu al-Aliyah favored Banu Hashim because he studied with Ibn Abbas; spiritual fatherhood outweighed his freedwoman's worldly emancipation. Against: ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الشعبي: When Abu al-ʿAliya left his estate to Banu Hashim despite having been freed by a woman of Riyah, al-Shaʿbi objected that he had no right to do so."}]}
{"id": "2:180/q18", "question": "May an inheriting relative receive a bequest?", "turns_on": "whether inheritance and a will may combine and whether other heirs can approve it", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q18/p1", "position": "A bequest to an heir is barred", "reasons": "The Prophet's saying 'God gave each right-holder his due; no bequest to an heir' is cited by al-Thaʿlabī, al-Baghawī, al-Zamakhsharī, Rāzī, al-Qurṭubī, and others. Al-Zamakhsharī treats communal reception as raising its transmission standing. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: Abu Umama reports the Prophet saying God assigned each rightful claimant a share, so there is no bequest to an heir; al-Tirmidhi grades it hasan sahih. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said God has given each rightful person their due and that no bequest is for an heir. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: A view held that this early Islamic bequest rule was abrogated by inheritance verses and the Prophetic rule that heirs receive no bequest. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · النبي: A prophetic report says God has assigned each rightful holder his right and that there is no bequest for an heir; the community's acceptance gives this solitary report near mass-transmitted status because they accept only established sound reports. | mentions 4:11 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · النبي: The Prophet says God has given each rights-holder their due, so an heir may not receive a bequest. BURHAN, d. 794 · قيل: Others say the verses are compatible and the bequest ruling was abrogated for heirs by the Prophetic report, “No bequest to an heir.” | mentions 4:11, 4:12 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet said that God assigned each right-holder their due and that there is no bequest for an heir; Aḥmad and the four collections transmit it from ʿAmr b. Khārija and Abū Umāma. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: At the Farewell Pilgrimage, the Prophet said God gave each rightful person their due and there is no bequest for an heir. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · قتادة: Qatada says khayr meant wealth, commonly a thousand or more; after parents were excluded and heirs received shares, bequests went to noninheriting relatives or others. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: The Prophet says God allotted each person an inheritance share, so a bequest for an heir is invalid; al-Tirmidhi authenticated the report. ITQAN, d. 911 · author: The deathbed bequest verse is said to be abrogated by inheritance verses, by the hadith that there is no bequest for an heir, or by consensus as Ibn al-Arabi reports. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · رسول الله صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم: The Prophet said God allotted each person an inheritance share, so no bequest may go to an heir; al-Tirmidhi graded the report sound. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · رسول الله صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم: Abu Umama says he heard the Prophet at the Farewell Pilgrimage say that God gave every rights-holder their due and there is no bequest to an heir. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الحسن: Abd ibn Humayd transmits a similar statement from Hasan. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Aleyhissalâtü vesselâm Efendimiz: At the Farewell Pilgrimage sermon, the Prophet said God had given each rights-holder their due and there is no bequest for an heir. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Inheritance’s fixed shares prohibit increase or decrease, so its obligation conflicts with an unrestricted duty to bequeath to an heir; permission with other heirs’ consent does not remove that conflict. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · some müctehidler: Some jurists hold that a bequest to a relative who already inherits is invalid. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · Hz. Peygamber: At the Farewell Pilgrimage, the Prophet said each rightful claimant had received their due and there was no bequest for an heir, barring bequests to relatives with fixed inheritance rights. STUDYQURAN · author: A bequest generally cannot designate someone who automatically inherits under the Quranic shares. | mentions 4:11, 4:12, 4:13"}, {"id": "2:180/q18/p2", "position": "An heir may receive a bequest", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabrisī reports Abū Jaʿfar's affirmative answer reciting this verse; a non-abrogation view allows both inheritance and a bequest. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: He argues that inheritance and a testator’s bequest can coexist as separate gifts, one from God and one from the dying person, so heirs may receive both. | mentions 4:11 Against: ELMALILI, d. 1361 ·
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
