<<chunk 25, part 4 of 0..5>>
e who chooses piety", "reasons": "Rāzī argues duties apply to pious and impious alike by consensus; the phrase names anyone who chooses piety. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · ابن الشيخ: Ibn al-Shaykh answers that the phrase does not restrict the duty to already pious people; it means the duty binds everyone who chooses and pursues piety."}, {"id": "2:180/q35/p3", "position": "The wording honors and urges the pious", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAṭiyya says singling them out honors their rank and invites imitation."}]}
{"id": "2:180/q36", "question": "Is making a bequest obligatory?", "turns_on": "whether the original and surviving command imposes a duty or recommendation", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q36/p1", "position": "The original command imposed an obligation", "reasons": "Muqātil, al-Ṭabarī, al-Māwardī, al-Zajjāj, and others treat kataba, ʿalaykum, and ḥaqqan as obligatory language; failure to bequeath to eligible kin ends in disobedience according to al-Ḍaḥḥāk. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas reports that property originally went to children and bequests to parents, then shares specified sons' double portion, parents' shares, and spouses' fractions. | mentions 4:11 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: One view holds the verse operative and makes a bequest to parents and relatives obligatory alongside their inheritance under the two verses. | mentions 4:11 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة: They say the verse initially governed all relatives, then was abrogated as to anyone who inherits by the inheritance verse. | mentions 4:11 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: On the stronger of two views, bequests to parents and relatives were obligatory before the inheritance verses; fixed inheritance shares abrogated the duty for heirs, who now take their divinely set shares without a bequest or the testator's favor. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says that initially only parents inherited alongside one another, while other relatives received by bequest; the inheritance verse set the parents' shares and preserved a bequest for relatives from one-third of the estate. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Bequest was initially obligatory, as the emphatic phrase indicates, then inheritance rules abrogated that duty for inheriting relatives while leaving bequest permissible in other cases. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The obligation protects wealth from waste and relatives from deprivation; those who truly fear God should not abandon this practice as originally prescribed. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The wording “was prescribed” signals that this obligation was inscribed in pre-eternity, though it applies to the person at the onset of death. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · قيل: Another account says bequests to heirs were obligatory without fixed shares, then God’s own bequest of inheritance shares replaced the former delegation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The verse legislated as a religious duty that owners make a suitable financial bequest for parents and relatives. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The amount judged proper was initially left to the dying person’s judgment and bequest. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: Abu Muslim uniquely dissents from the exegetical consensus, holding that the verse’s bequest obligation was not abrogated. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Early Islam may have had no inheritance at all, or inheritance only for children; in either case a bequest was required for parents and other relatives, with children outside al-aqrabīn in the second scenario. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Carrying out this fair bequest is an obligatory right upon the God-fearing. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · أحدهما عليهما السلام: One of the two Imams says the bequest verse was abrogated by the inheritance shares; al-Tabataba’i reconciles this with other reports by retaining recommendation while dropping only obligation. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 · author: Those leaving much wealth should bequeath to particularly deserving family members in addition to, and before distributing, the fixed inheritance shares in 4:11–12. | mentions 4:11, 4:12 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: The verse initially required bequests to all relatives, male and female, especially parents, preparing believers for the later inheritance rules."}, {"id": "2:180/q36/p2", "position": "A voluntary bequest is recommended or optional", "reasons": "Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī says the Prophet died without a property will and Abū Bakr made one, so either practice is acceptable; Ibn ʿUmar himself declined a will to protect his children. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عمر وابن عباس وابن زيد: They say the whole verse was abrogated, leaving bequest as recommended; Malik and reports from al-Sha'bi and al-Nakha'i are similar. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الربيع بن خثيم: Al-Rabi says there is no bequest; when asked for his codex, he cited Qur'anic priority of kin, as Ibn Umar also did. | mentions 8:75 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Ḥaqqan means due care and assurance, not obligatory duty; limiting it to the Godfearing signals recommendation rather than universal obligation. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Another view keeps the verse for non-inheriting relatives, including non-Muslim parents of new Muslims; a recommended bequest maintains kinship, and كتب then does not mean obligatory. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عمر وابن عباس وابن زيد: They regard the entire verse as abrogated; the bequest remains recommended, a position also attributed to al-Shaʿbi, al-Nakhaʿi, and Malik. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الربيع بن خثيم وغيره: Al-Rabiʿ ibn Khuthaym and others are reported as holding that there is no bequest. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another view denies that making a will is obligatory, citing al-Nakhaʿi's report that the Prophet died without making one and a hadith that conditions it on wanting to make a will. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: In later technical usage, the partial view is specification, not abrogation: inheritance law removes heirs from the general term relatives while non-inheriting relatives remain covered; this fits those who regard the original bequest as recommended. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Inheritance law is an independent divine obligation for fixed-share heirs and residuaries, replacing the earlier ruling; bequests for non-inheriting relatives remain recommended from one-third, supported by this verse and the Prophet's instruction to keep a written will. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The bequest ruling applied when it served justice and wisdom, then was abrogated by the inheritance verse in Surat al-Nisa; bequests are no longer obligatory and may go to non-heirs, but not heirs. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الأكثرون: Most hold that obligation was abrogated for everyone, while bequests to non-inheriting relatives remain recommended. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · bazıları: Some scholars considered the bequest recommended rather than obligatory because determining wealth and proper allocation requires judgment; Elmalılı rejects that view. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The majority’s fourth proof is that the bequest hadith predates the inheritance rules and its obligation was abrogated; a bequest to non-heir kin is at least recommended. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Once inheritance was extended beyond children, the definite bequest obligation was abrogated, while kinship rights were further secured. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: Where no such debt or right exists, bequest is recommended rather than obligatory when circumstances allow; hadiths encouraging bequests are read this way. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · müctehidler çoğunluğu: Most jurists, including the four imams, say bequest was first obligatory but inheritance verses partly changed the rule, leaving bequests recommended rather than obligatory. STUDYQURAN · author: One interpretation makes the bequest conditional on leaving property, so it is not universally obligatory; debts and other financial obligations are paid first, and the clause can mean should one desire a bequest."}, {"id": "2:180/q36/p3", "position": "Obligatory only to preserve outstanding rights", "reasons": "Abū Thawr, approved by Ibn al-Mundhir, requires a will for debts or deposits but not without an outstanding claim. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · العلماء: Scholars agree that someone holding entrusted property or owing debts must make a bequest to disclose and discharge those obligations. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مالك والشافعي والثوري: The majority say bequest is not obligatory for someone with no deposits or debts, whether wealthy or poor. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: A bequest is obligatory if silence risks losing another person's right, so one must promptly record and disclose it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · أبو ثور: Abu Thawr says a will is obligatory only for someone with a debt or property entrusted by others; it is not obligatory for someone with neither. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: In some cases and for some people, bequests to discharge obligations owed to God or people, including debts and deposits, remain obligatory; this verse also grounds other bequest rulings."}, {"id": "2:180/q36/p4", "position": "Obligatory for anyone who leaves property", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الزهري: Al-Zuhri says bequest is obligatory whether the estate is small or large. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الثوري: Al-Thawri takes the apparent command to make a will as obligatory for anyone who leaves property."}, {"id": "2:180/q36/p5", "position": "Obligatory for noninheriting relatives", "reasons": "ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The minority’s first proof is that the verse generally obligates a bequest to relatives; inheritance verses, the heir hadith, or consensus remove heirs, but no abrogating proof removes non-heir relatives. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The minority infers the obligatory bequest must concern relatives, since bequests to outsiders are unanimously not obligatory; they say the Sunnah reinfor
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
