<<chunk 26, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:180/q37", "question": "Was this bequest rule abrogated, and how far?", "turns_on": "whether inheritance replaced the whole duty, removed heirs only, or left the verse operative", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q37/p1", "position": "The obligatory bequest rule was wholly abrogated", "reasons": "Ibn ʿUmar, Ibn Zayd, Shurayḥ, Mujāhid, and many later jurists attribute total replacement to 4:7 or 4:11; Shurayḥ says one could previously bequeath all. Al-Zajjāj points to agreement that a person may omit a third, which undercuts a surviving obligatory command. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عمر وابن عباس وابن زيد: They say the whole verse was abrogated, leaving bequest as recommended; Malik and reports from al-Sha'bi and al-Nakha'i are similar. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عمر وابن عباس وابن زيد: They regard the entire verse as abrogated; the bequest remains recommended, a position also attributed to al-Shaʿbi, al-Nakhaʿi, and Malik. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: After reciting the verse, Ibn Abbas said it had been abrogated; al-Hakim graded this report authentic on the two authorities' criteria. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas, via Ata, says this bequest verse was abrogated by the inheritance ruling in 4:7. | mentions 4:7 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عمر وأبو موسى وسعيد بن المسيب والحسن ومجاهد وعطاء وسعيد بن جبير: Ibn Abi Hatim lists Ibn Umar, Abu Musa, Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib, Hasan, Mujahid, Ata, and Saʿid ibn Jubayr as holding that inheritance verses abrogated this verse. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · محمد بن سيرين وعكرمة وزيد بن أسلم والربيع بن أنس وقتادة والسدي ومقاتل بن حيان: Ibn Abi Hatim also lists Ibn Sirin, Ikrima, Zayd ibn Aslam, al-Rabi, Qatada, al-Suddi, and Muqatil ibn Hayyan as holding that inheritance verses abrogated this verse. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · طاوس وإبراهيم النخعي وشريح والضحاك والزهري: Ibn Abi Hatim also lists Tawus, Ibrahim al-Nakhaʿi, Shurayh, al-Dahhak, and al-Zuhri as holding that inheritance verses abrogated this verse. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas said this verse had been abrogated while explaining the sura; al-Hakim authenticated the report. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the bequest for parents and relatives applied until the inheritance verse superseded it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عمر: Ibn Umar says the inheritance verse abrogated this bequest verse. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · شريح: Shurayh says a person used to be able to bequeath all his property until the inheritance verse was revealed. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · مجاهد: Mujahid says children received inheritance and parents and relatives received bequests, a rule later abrogated. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The bequest ruling applied when it served justice and wisdom, then was abrogated by the inheritance verse in Surat al-Nisa; bequests are no longer obligatory and may go to non-heirs, but not heirs. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الأكثرون: Most hold that obligation was abrogated for everyone, while bequests to non-inheriting relatives remain recommended. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The majority of commentators and authoritative jurists say the duty is wholly abrogated. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The majority argues 4:7 uses the same parent-and-relative categories and assigns men and women fixed shares from any-sized estate; this fixed inheritance right replaces the bequest duty, so abrogation is total. | mentions 4:7 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The majority’s second proof is that inheritance law defines kinship rights and excludes distant relatives, leaving no mandatory bequest duty for nonheirs to survive abrogation. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Although Rāzī reports this as analogy, Elmalılı calls it an implication of the text that entails abrogation and says it is the strongest argument. | mentions 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The majority’s fourth proof is that the bequest hadith predates the inheritance rules and its obligation was abrogated; a bequest to non-heir kin is at least recommended. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Elmalılı says the earlier reports from Ali and Aisha support this account of the original rule. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Once inheritance was extended beyond children, the definite bequest obligation was abrogated, while kinship rights were further secured. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Only the explicit rule making a financial bequest obligatory is wholly abrogated; other implications and indications may still operate under legal method. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Abu Muslim’s first interpretation gives this verse no meaning beyond inheritance verses; Elmalılı says that neglects rather than preserves the disputed ruling and effectively admits its total abrogation. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 TABATABAI, d. 1402 · أحدهما عليهما السلام: One of the two Imams says the bequest verse was abrogated by the inheritance shares; al-Tabataba’i reconciles this with other reports by retaining recommendation while dropping only obligation. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Some say the inheritance verse abrogated this command; if so, only its obligatory force was abrogated, while recommendation and desirability remain, perhaps signaled by ‘upon the pious.’ KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · müctehidler çoğunluğu: Most jurists, including the four imams, say bequest was first obligatory but inheritance verses partly changed the rule, leaving bequests recommended rather than obligatory. STUDYQURAN · Some: Some consider the bequest verse completely abrogated. Against: BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Al-Bayḍāwī questions abrogation: inheritance rules do not contradict the verse and can confirm priority for bequests; the solitary hadith does not become mass-transmitted merely through communal acceptance."}, {"id": "2:180/q37/p2", "position": "The duty ceases for heirs but remains for noninheriting kin", "reasons": "Qatāda, Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Ḥasan, Ṭāwūs, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, and others retain it for non-heir relatives, including parents excluded by unbelief or slavery. Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and reports from ʿAlī call omission sinful. Muqātil allows up to one third. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الضحاك وطاوس والحسن: One view holds the verse operative, restricted to noninheriting parents, such as non-Muslims or slaves, and noninheriting relatives; al-Tabari prefers it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الطبري: Al-Tabari chooses the view that the verse remains operative for noninheriting parents and relatives. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة: They say the verse was general and applied temporarily, then inheritance shares abrogated it for heirs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس والحسن: Ibn Abbas and al-Hasan say inheritance shares in Surat al-Nisa abrogated bequests to parents but preserved them for noninheriting relatives; al-Shafi'i and most Malikis agree. | mentions 4:11 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الحسن وطاووس والضحاك: They limit the operative command to parents and relatives who do not inherit, such as enslaved or non-Muslim kin, and to a bequest of one third or less. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة: They say the verse initially governed all relatives, then was abrogated as to anyone who inherits by the inheritance verse. | mentions 4:11 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: On the stronger of two views, bequests to parents and relatives were obligatory before the inheritance verses; fixed inheritance shares abrogated the duty for heirs, who now take their divinely set shares without a bequest or the testator's favor. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says that initially only parents inherited alongside one another, while other relatives received by bequest; the inheritance verse set the parents' shares and preserved a bequest for relatives from one-third of the estate. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس والحسن ومسروق وطاوس والضحاك ومسلم بن يسار والعلاء بن زياد: A reported middle view abrogates bequests for relatives who inherit but preserves them for those who do not; Ibn Abbas, Hasan, Masruq, Tawus, al-Dahhak, Muslim ibn Yasar, and al-Ala ibn Ziyad hold it. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · سعيد بن جبير والربيع بن أنس وقتادة ومقاتل بن حيان: Ibn Kathir adds Saʿid ibn Jubayr, al-Rabi, Qatada, and Muqatil ibn Hayyan to those holding that bequests were abrogated for heirs but remained for non-heirs. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: In later technical usage, the partial view is specification, not abrogation: inheritance law removes heirs from the general term relatives while non-inheriting relatives remain covered; this fits those who regard the original bequest as recommended. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Inheritance law is an independent divine obligation for fixed-share heirs and residuaries, replacing the earlier ruling; bequests for non-inheriting relatives remain recommended from one-third, supported by this verse and the Prophet's instruction to keep a written will. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says children inherited while parents received a bequest; the inheritance verse in 4:7 abrogated the bequest for parents. | mentions 4:7 DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the inheritance verse detailed the parents' shares and retained a bequest of up to one third for relatives who did not inherit. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas distinguishes inheriting relatives, whose bequest was abrogated, from noninheriting relatives, whose bequest remained. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas holds that the duty was abrogated only for inheriting relatives and remained binding for non-inheriting relatives, such as non-Muslim kin. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Inheritance law strengthened the kinship and parenthood right, while abrogating bequests to relatives who inherit. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Hasan-ı Basrî, Mesrûk, Tâvûs, Dahhâk, Müslim b. Yesâr, Alâ b. Ziyâd: These early authorities hold that the duty was abrogated for heir relatives but remains for non-heir relatives, a partial rather than total abrogation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author:
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
