<<chunk 26, part 1 of 0..5>>
 The minority’s first proof is that the verse generally obligates a bequest to relatives; inheritance verses, the heir hadith, or consensus remove heirs, but no abrogating proof removes non-heir relatives. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: If the rules conflict, Abu Muslim says inheritance law specifies the earlier duty by excluding heirs while leaving non-heir relatives within its scope. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Elmalılı says Abu Muslim’s position in substance defends the minority’s partial abrogation, but calling it specification is wrong because inheritance verses came later, so the ruling was partly abrogated. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 STUDYQURAN · Others: Others hold that it is abrogated only for heirs entitled to Quranic shares and remains applicable to others. | mentions 4:11, 4:12, 4:13"}, {"id": "2:180/q37/p3", "position": "The verse remains operative", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabarī and al-Ṭabrisī argue inheritance and bequest can coexist and abrogation needs decisive conflict or proof; Rāzī rejects a solitary report, claimed consensus, and analogy as sufficient to erase a certain Qurʾānic rule. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Al-Bayḍāwī questions abrogation: inheritance rules do not contradict the verse and can confirm priority for bequests; the solitary hadith does not become mass-transmitted merely through communal acceptance. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: One view holds the verse operative and makes a bequest to parents and relatives obligatory alongside their inheritance under the two verses. | mentions 4:11 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: Another view considers the verse operative but understands it to recommend voluntary bequests. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · أبو مسلم الأصفهاني: Abu Muslim says the verse was not abrogated but explains inheritance legislation, glossing it as God's prescription for inheriting parents and relatives under 4:11; al-Razi says this is the view of most commentators and recognized jurists, which Ibn Kathir finds surprising. | mentions 4:11 BURHAN, d. 794 · قيل: Others say the verses are compatible and the bequest ruling was abrogated for heirs by the Prophetic report, “No bequest to an heir.” | mentions 4:11, 4:12 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: Abu Muslim uniquely dissents from the exegetical consensus, holding that the verse’s bequest obligation was not abrogated. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · Dahhâk, Tâvûs, Taberî: Dahhak, Tawus, and Tabari hold that the bequest verse was not abrogated; it applies to relatives excluded from inheritance, such as parents of another religion or enslaved relatives. STUDYQURAN · Shiites: Shiites hold that the verse is not abrogated and does not conflict with another Quranic verse, given their different inheritance framework. STUDYQURAN · Others: Others say this verse remains unabrogated because a hadith is less certain than the Quran and cannot replace its ruling. | mentions 2:106 Against: ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Elmalılı attributes Abu Muslim’s denial of Qurʾanic abrogation to reading 2:106 as limited by context to earlier scriptures and notes some contemporary Egyptian writers follow him. | mentions 2:106"}, {"id": "2:180/q37/p4", "position": "Inheritance rules removed bequests to heirs", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi prefers that authentic Sunna, not inheritance shares alone, abrogated bequests to heirs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Although al-Shafi'i and Abu al-Faraj disallow abrogating Qur'an by Sunna, al-Qurtubi permits it because both are God's rulings. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: A view held that this early Islamic bequest rule was abrogated by inheritance verses and the Prophetic rule that heirs receive no bequest. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: One view says bequests to heirs were required early in Islam, then abrogated by inheritance verses, as explained in Sharh al-Manar. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Because the verse's context indicates an obligatory bequest, the author sides with the majority: bequests to inheriting relatives are abrogated by inheritance law and forbidden by the no-bequest-for-an-heir hadith. BURHAN, d. 794 · قيل: Some say the inheritance verses abrogated the earlier command to bequeath to parents and relatives, since one cannot both inherit and receive a bequest. | mentions 4:11, 4:12 BURHAN, d. 794 · author: The author answers that the bequest verse was abrogated by Qurʾan, not by the report Ibn ʿAtiyya cites. | mentions 4:11, 4:12 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Bequest was initially obligatory, as the emphatic phrase indicates, then inheritance rules abrogated that duty for inheriting relatives while leaving bequest permissible in other cases. ITQAN, d. 911 · author: The deathbed bequest verse is said to be abrogated by inheritance verses, by the hadith that there is no bequest for an heir, or by consensus as Ibn al-Arabi reports. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · ابن عباس وابن عمر وقتادة وشريح ومجاهد: Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umar, Qatada, Shurayh, Mujahid, and others hold that the original bequest ruling was abrogated by inheritance verses. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The inheritance verse itself effected abrogation, while the hadith explain how; al-Fakhr al-Islam then gives two arguments. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · فخر الإسلام: Al-Fakhr argues that the later inheritance verse says “after a bequest” indefinitely; if the earlier specified bequest still governed, inheritance would follow it, so the unrestricted wording abrogates it. | mentions 4:11, 4:12 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · فخر الإسلام: His second argument treats abrogation as transfer: God first required fair bequests among kin, then fixed shares Himself because testators may misjudge or intend harm. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · فخر الإسلام: The fixed inheritance shares replace delegated bequests with God’s wiser allotment, like a principal freeing a slave after instructing an agent to do so. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Later inheritance verses in Sūrat al-Nisāʾ fixed these shares, relieving people of deciding them at death and reducing the risk of resentment among relatives. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Therefore, the bequest to heirs was abrogated either by the inheritance verses’ implication or by the explicit wording of these hadiths. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Elmalılı says Abu Muslim Isfahani is the only scholar known to deny abrogation in this way. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: On Abu Muslim’s account, the verse cannot be applied while taking inheritance law into account. | mentions 4:7, 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The earlier obligation to make a bequest was abrogated, but these verses do not abrogate the continuing duty to execute a lawful bequest."}, {"id": "2:180/q37/p5", "position": "The verse states or safeguards God's inheritance allocation", "reasons": "Abū Muslim's harmonization treats the bequest as God's allocation in 4:11 or the dying person's preservation of those shares; al-Zamakhsharī transmits a similar reading. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: To avoid conflict, al-waṣiyya may mean God’s command that parents and relatives inherit, or the dying person’s allocation of what God prescribed for them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · قول غير مسمى: A further view says the will command does not conflict with inheritance; it concerns God's assignment of parents' and relatives' shares. | mentions 4:11 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · قيل: Another account says bequests to heirs were obligatory without fixed shares, then God’s own bequest of inheritance shares replaced the former delegation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: Alternatively, Abu Muslim says the dying person must ensure parents and relatives receive their full inheritance shares without concealment or reduction. | mentions 4:11 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · Ebû Müslim-i İsfahânî: Abu Muslim’s first interpretation is that the bequest here means God’s inheritance assignment for parents and relatives in 4:11. | mentions 4:11 Against: ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi rejects anti-abrogation readings that identify the bequest with God’s inheritance allotment or the decedent’s duty to execute it. Against: ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: Abu Muslim’s first interpretation gives this verse no meaning beyond inheritance verses; Elmalılı says that neglects rather than preserves the disputed ruling and effectively admits its total abrogation. | mentions 4:7, 4:11"}]}
{"id": "2:180/q38", "question": "What evidence is said to change or preserve this rule?", "turns_on": "the force of inheritance verses, Prophetic reports, consensus, and specification", "positions": [{"id": "2:180/q38/p1", "position": "Inheritance verses supply the abrogating rule", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس والحسن وقتادة: They say the verse was general and applied temporarily, then inheritance shares abrogated it for heirs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس والحسن: Ibn Abbas and al-Hasan say inheritance shares in Surat al-Nisa abrogated bequests to parents but preserved them for noninheriting relatives; al-Shafi'i and most Malikis agree. | mentions 4:11 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عمر وابن عباس وابن زيد: They say the whole verse was abrogated, leaving bequest as recommended; Malik and reports from al-Sha'bi and al-Nakha'i are similar. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: On the stronger of two views, bequests to parents and relatives were obligatory before the inheritance verses; fixed inheritance shares abrogated the duty for heirs, who now take their divinely set shares without a bequest or the testator's favor. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عباس: After reciting the verse, Ibn Abbas said it had been abrogated; al-Hakim graded this report authentic on the two authorities' criteria. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · ابن عمر وأبو موسى وسعيد بن المسيب والحسن ومجاهد وعطاء وسعيد بن جبير: Ibn Abi Hatim lists Ibn Umar, Abu Musa, Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib, Hasan, Mujahid, Ata, and Saʿid ibn Jubayr as holding
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
