<<chunk 28, part 1 of 0..4>>
: [{"id": "2:200/q32/p1", "position": "Rites subdue the lower self; remembrance illuminates the heart and demands continual love, purity and freedom from pride.", "reasons": "Razi describes negating all but the Real and then affirming Him; Qushayri contrasts bodily service with the heart's love and urges pride in God, reverent intimacy and tireless remembrance. Qashani urges study with companions and guidance of others; Elmalılı sees Hajj as renouncing shirk, pride and sensual drives."}]}
{"id": "2:200/q33", "question": "What do the cited digressions say about jinn and devils?", "turns_on": "Whether jinn are airy bodies, immaterial spirits, or unreal.", "positions": [{"id": "2:200/q33/p1", "position": "They are airy rational bodies able to take forms and perform difficult acts.", "reasons": "Razi reports this as one account."}, {"id": "2:200/q33/p2", "position": "They are immaterial entities with ranks of spirits, from angels to governing spirits.", "reasons": "Razi reports many holders; he describes associations with Throne, Kursi, spheres and natural things, citing 21:19, 69:17 and 39:75. He says luminous good spirits are righteous jinn and dark evil ones devils."}, {"id": "2:200/q33/p3", "position": "Their existence is denied on perceptual and physical grounds.", "reasons": "Deniers argue dense bodies would be visible, subtle bodies could not endure winds or labor, and long contact should yield observed effects; Razi says jinn and devils are not ordinary dense bodies."}]}
{"id": "2:200/q34", "question": "What does the cited negative-noun poetry illustrate?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:200/q34/p1", "position": "Arabic poetry mixes nominative and accusative indefinite nouns after negation, sometimes under implicit negation.", "reasons": "Farra cites Umayya's 'no idle speech nor sin' and another poet; Abu al-Jarrah's line has nominative kilāhumā with an implicit 'not one of two,' and another line similarly supplies an unstated negation. Farra says this is poetic usage, not a canonical reading."}]}
{"id": "2:200/q35", "question": "What do the cited digressions say about verse placement and compilation?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:200/q35/p1", "position": "Placement of verses within sūras was fixed by prophetic instruction; compilation proceeded in stages.", "reasons": "Burhan quotes Abu Bakr al-Qadi, Makki and others on Gabriel's instruction, basmala and al-Tawba; Zayd's report describes compilation around the Prophet, graded sound by Hakim. Burhan distinguishes later collection under Abu Bakr and sura order under Uthman, and reports preference for Zayd's reading over Ubayy's."}]}
{"id": "2:200/q36", "question": "What distinction is proposed between sīn and sawfa?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:200/q36/p1", "position": "One objection says sīn may promise this-worldly fulfillment and sawfa the afterlife.", "reasons": "Burhan reports this proposal."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q01", "question": "Who asked about wine and gambling, and why?", "turns_on": "Reports differ in the named questioners and their stated motive.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q01/p1", "position": "Companions, often named as ʿUmar and Muʿādh, asked because wine impairs reason and gambling consumes wealth.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The verse was revealed concerning Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Umar ibn al-Khattab, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and several Helpers; maysir means gambling. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب ومعاذ بن جبل): Umar, Muadh, and several Ansar asked the Prophet for a ruling on wine and gambling, saying they destroy reason and consume wealth; the verse was revealed in response. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Māwardī says the Companions asked Muhammad about wine and gambling, and that this was the first verse revealed on the subject. WAHIDI-ASBAB (author): Al-Wahidi reports that Umar, Muadh ibn Jabal, and some Ansar asked Muhammad for guidance about wine and gambling, saying both impair reason and consume wealth. WAHIDI-BASIT (عمر بن الخطاب ومعاذ بن جبل وسعد بن أبي وقاص): The verse was revealed after Umar, Muʿadh, Saʿd, and others asked the Prophet about wine and gambling, saying they impair reason and take wealth. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (عمر، ومعاذ، وسعد بن أبي وقاص): ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ asked the Messenger for a ruling because wine and gambling destroy reason and strip away wealth. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The verse was revealed after ʿUmar, Muʿādh ibn Jabal, and a group of Anṣār asked about wine and gambling because they impair reason and consume wealth. KASHSHAF-FULL (عمر ومعاذ ونفر من الصحابة): Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked for a ruling because wine destroys reason and property; the verse about sin and benefit followed, and some drank while others abstained. TABRISI (جماعة من الصحابة): A group of Companions asked the Prophet about wine and gambling because they destroy reason and strip away wealth; this verse was revealed in response. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عمر بن الخطاب): One occasion report says ʿUmar asked God to give a decisive clarification about wine, after which this verse was revealed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الأنصار وعمر ومعاذ): Another occasion report says a group of Anṣār, including ʿUmar and Muʿādh, asked the Prophet for a ruling because wine removes reason and takes away wealth; this verse was revealed. RAZI-FULL (عمر ومعاذ ونفر من الصحابة): A report of the staged prohibition says wine was initially lawful, then Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked for a ruling because it ruins reason and wealth, prompting this verse; some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 RAZI-FULL (author): Because Umar and Muadh sought a ruling on wine as a destroyer of reason and wealth, Razi argues that anything with the same effect must be wine or share its ruling. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A chronology says the earlier verse about date and grape products led Muslims to drink; Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked about wine, and this verse followed. | mentions 1, 6, :, 6, 7 NASAFI-FULL (author): The author recounts the stages: the first Meccan verse (16:67) allowed intoxicants; after Umar and others asked about wine’s harm, this verse followed. Some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عمر ومعاذ): The occasion reported is that ʿUmar and Muʿādh asked the Prophet for a ruling on wine and gambling, saying they destroy reason and strip away wealth. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the Companions asked only thirteen questions before the Prophet's death, all answered in the Quran, including wine and gambling, sacred months, orphans, menstruation, spoils, and spending; they asked about what benefited them. | mentions 2:217, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1 SUYUTI-LUBAB (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked what portion of their wealth they should give; the answer was to spend the surplus. BURSEVI (المفسرون): After ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and other Companions asked about wine because it removes reason, the verse on wine and gambling was revealed; some tried to take its benefits while avoiding its sin, while others abstained. BURSEVI (عمر بن الخطاب): ʿUmar donated half his wealth to outdo Abū Bakr, but when asked what remained for his family he said half; Abū Bakr gave everything, saying Allah and His Messenger remained for them, and ʿUmar conceded he would not compete again. ALUSI-FULL (الواحدى): Al-Wāḥidī says ʿUmar, Muʿādh ibn Jabal, and a group of Anṣār asked the Prophet for a ruling because wine and gambling destroy reason and consume wealth; this verse was revealed. ELMALILI (Hazret-i Ömer ve Muâz ve diğer bazı ashâb-ı kirâm): Umar, Muadh, and other Companions sought a ruling because wine removes reason, occasioning this verse. ELMALILI (author): ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and other Companions asked the Prophet for a ruling on wine because it removes the intellect; this verse was revealed. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Ömer ve birçok sahâbî): Umar and many Companions repeatedly asked for clarification about wine and gambling; their requests are cited among the occasions for the successive explanatory and prohibitory revelations. | mentions 5:90"}, {"id": "2:219/q01/p2", "position": "Other reports name a different set or portray a general request for clarification.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Mujahid calls this the first occasion on which wine was censured. THALABI (عائشة): Jisra bint Dajaja reports Aisha repeatedly saying she does not permit an intoxicant, even if made from bread, when asked about alternating batches of nabidh. THALABI (ابن عباس): Asked about bazidh, Ibn Abbas says whatever intoxicates is forbidden. WAHIDI-BASIT (مقاتل): A further derivation takes maysir from ease because people shared a camel to make its cost easier; Muqatil says they asked to split its price. BAGHAWI-FULL (ابن عباس): When asked about bādhīq, Ibn ʿAbbās says Muhammad had already ruled on it: anything intoxicating is forbidden. RAZI-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن عوف): At a meal hosted by Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, guests drank, became intoxicated, and one recited the opening of al-Kafirun incorrectly; this occasioned the prayer-time restriction. | mentions 4:43 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The questioners about wine and gambling are believers, as Qurtubi noted earlier. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The plural verb is used although the reported questioners were two, since Arabic can attribute one person’s act to a group. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The believers asked the Messenger about wine and gambling as God had foretold; the answer that both involve grave sin was meant to lead them to abstain and indicates their prohibition. BIQAI-FULL (author): The author says wine was among the spoils taken by Abdullah ibn Jahsh's expedition, which occasioned the preceding verses. BIQAI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): When a woman asked what she could give from her husband's wealth, the Prophet answered fresh fruit: it may be eaten or gifted before it spoils. SUYUTI-LUBAB (يحيى): Yaḥyā relates that Muʿādh b. Jabal and Thaʿlaba asked what to spend f
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
