<<chunk 28, part 2 of 0..4>>
rom their wealth because they had dependents and families; this verse was revealed. BURSEVI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the Companions were exceptionally good: they asked the Messenger only thirteen questions, all answered in the Qurʾan, and asked only about matters beneficial to them and Muslims. ALUSI-FULL (معاذ بن جبل وثعلبة): A report through Abān from Yaḥyā says Muʿādh and Thaʿlaba, with households and dependents, asked the Prophet how much of their wealth to spend. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): As wine and gambling began to be prohibited, people who used them to aid the poor asked what to give; God answered “al-afw,” meaning surplus after needs or a suitable part of it."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q02", "question": "Why does the answer use قُلْ?", "turns_on": "The formula may be explained as a response pattern or as an honor to Muhammad.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q02/p1", "position": "The explicit command honors Muhammad as the addressee and confirms his prophetic delivery of revelation.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The explicit command qul functions as a seal confirming Muhammad's prophethood and honoring him as God's addressee for delivering revelation. | mentions 2:217, 2:219, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1, 18:83, 10:53, 4:176"}, {"id": "2:219/q02/p2", "position": "The verse belongs to a pattern of question-answer formulas using qul, fa-qul, or no stated formula.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Razi distinguishes four answer forms: replies introduced by qul, by fa-qul, questions with no stated answer, and answers without either formula; he illustrates them with the cited questions. | mentions 2:217, 2:219, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1, 18:83, 10:53, 4:176, 2:186, 7:187, 20:105"}]}
{"id": "2:219/q03", "question": "What exactly was being asked about wine and gambling?", "turns_on": "Whether the question seeks a ruling, a definition, or the consequences of the practices.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q03/p1", "position": "The question sought their ruling or permissibility, including the acts of drinking and gambling.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The verse was revealed after ʿUmar, Muʿādh ibn Jabal, and a group of Anṣār asked about wine and gambling because they impair reason and consume wealth. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi answers that the question concerns wine generally, so its sin necessarily accompanies it under every circumstance; drinking entails that forbidden consequence and is itself forbidden. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A chronology says the earlier verse about date and grape products led Muslims to drink; Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked about wine, and this verse followed. | mentions 1, 6, :, 6, 7 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The question is about engaging in wine and gambling, as shown by the answer’s reference to what is in both. NASAFI-FULL (author): The author recounts the stages: the first Meccan verse (16:67) allowed intoxicants; after Umar and others asked about wine’s harm, this verse followed. Some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض من ألف في الناسخ والمنسوخ): Some works on abrogation say most scholars regard this verse as abrogating the prior permissibility of wine, setting aside the Meccan Anʿām passage. | mentions 6:145 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): As with wine and gambling, some benefit from a forbidden thing does not establish permissibility. SAMIN-DURR (author): A noun is omitted after عن: the question concerns the ruling on wine and gambling, including permissibility or prohibition, not the substances themselves; the answer matches that understood question. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the Companions asked only thirteen questions before the Prophet's death, all answered in the Quran, including wine and gambling, sacred months, orphans, menstruation, spoils, and spending; they asked about what benefited them. | mentions 2:217, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1 BURSEVI (author): The question is about the ruling on consuming wine, since permissibility, prohibition, sin, and obedience attach to accountable acts, not to objects in themselves; the ruling also covers sale and purchase. BURSEVI (المفسرون): After ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and other Companions asked about wine because it removes reason, the verse on wine and gambling was revealed; some tried to take its benefits while avoiding its sin, while others abstained. ALUSI-FULL (author): The question concerns engaging in wine and gambling, as the answer’s “in them” makes clear; their sin comes from leading to neglected duties and committed prohibitions."}, {"id": "2:219/q03/p2", "position": "The question asked what these practices are or what follows from them.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The question concerns the consequences of engaging in wine and gambling, as indicated by the following explanation of their sin and benefit. RAZI-FULL (author): The question does not specify whether it asks what wine and gambling are, whether they may be used, or whether drinking is lawful; the answer about sin implies a question about permissibility. NASAFI-FULL (author): The question concerns the consequences of participating in drinking and gambling, as shown by the answer about sin and benefits. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): They ask about the legal status, permissibility, and use of wine and gambling, not about what substances they are; the answer therefore addresses their ruling."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q04", "question": "What does ٱلْخَمْرِ mean and how is its name explained?", "turns_on": "Whether khamr is a broad Arabic name for intoxication or a narrower beverage name; the root is explained through covering, mixing, or maturation.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q04/p1", "position": "Khamr is every intoxicant or drink that clouds the intellect; its name relates to covering the mind.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the passage was superseded by three verses in al-Māʾida and discusses the Prophet’s wine punishment: he treated it as a hadd by his judgment, not a fixed, named hadd. | mentions 5:90 ZAJJAJ (author): Wine is the agreed case; by analogy, anything that acts like it is also called khamr and has the same prohibition. ZAJJAJ (author): Khamr is named from covering: it applies to what veils a person, a woman’s veil, a prayer mat covering the face, and dough covered by fermentation. ZAJJAJ (author): Wine is prohibited by the Qur’anic text because it is called a great sin, and God explicitly forbids sin; Zajjāj cites 7:33 despite consensus. | mentions 7:33 IBNABIHATIM (عمر بن الخطاب): Umar says wine's prohibition concerned products of grapes, honey, dates, wheat, and barley, and defines wine as whatever overwhelms the intellect. IBNABIHATIM (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports that people drank wine after the initial verse, then left it when the prohibition in al-Ma'ida was announced; their drink was date nabidh called fadikh. | mentions 5:90 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Wine is not linguistically identical to nabīdh; primary names are not assigned by analogy, as Abū al-Aswad’s poem calls wine its sister. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): They support this with Abu Hurayra's report that the Prophet said wine comes from the date palm and grapevine. THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman says the well-known Abd al-Malik report conflicts with al-Zubayr's version: Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying every intoxicant is forbidden and every intoxicant is wine. THALABI (مالك والشافعي وأحمد بن حنبل وأبو ثور وأكثر أهل الآثار): They define wine as every intoxicating drink, whether grape-based or otherwise, and forbid any amount; its drinker receives the penalty except for the specified cooked drink after a third evaporates, whose testimony remains valid. THALABI (author): Khamr derives from covering: it names things that cover other things, including a woman's veil and a prayer rug; wine is so called because it covers the mind. THALABI (عمر): In a sermon reported through Ibn Umar, Umar says wine prohibition was revealed and wine is made from grapes, dates, wheat, barley, or honey; wine is whatever clouds the mind. THALABI (أنس): Anas says the common wine in Medina at the time of prohibition was fadikh, made from dates and unripe dates without heating; Medina lacked grapes for wine. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet is reported to say that every intoxicant is wine and every wine is forbidden. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says every intoxicant is wine and whatever intoxicates in a large quantity is forbidden even in a small quantity. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A second prophetic report says wine is forbidden because of its intoxicating substance, not its name, and every drink whose end result is wine is forbidden. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Khamr is anything that obscures, veils, and covers the intellect. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The root idea is covering: khamara is to cover a vessel, and the woman's khimār is named for covering her. MAWARDI-FULL (العجاج): Al-Ajjaj's line uses al-khamr for a hidden or stealthy approach; the animal in his poem does not approach stealthily but openly with banners and troops. WAHIDI-BASIT (مالك والشافعي وأحمد وأهل الأثر): Malik, al-Shafiʿi, Ahmad, and hadith scholars define khamr as every intoxicating drink, from juice or infusion, cooked or raw; the author says Arabic supports this view. WAHIDI-BASIT (أهل اللغة): Linguists derive khamr from covering because wine veils the intellect. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن المظفر): Ibn al-Muzaffar defines khamr, its ripening and boiling, its maker, and the veil affecting a drunk person. WAHIDI-BASIT (الكسائي): Al-Kisaʾi says one says ikhtamartu khamran, but not akhmartuha. WAHIDI-BASIT (ثعلب): Thaʿlab transmits that khāmir can mean one who conceals testimony; the root sense is covering, also reflected in the Prophetic instruction to cover vessels. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Khamr can mean a place or thing that conceals someone, such as trees or a mound; khāmiri umm ʿāmir means go into hiding. JISHUMI (author): Khamr derives from covering: one cover
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
