<<chunk 28, part 4 of 0..4>>
hamr. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): In Arabic, khamr commonly names all these intoxicating drinks. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith states that every intoxicant is khamr and every intoxicant is forbidden; no grading is stated. STUDYQURAN (author): The prohibition of drinking wine is discussed at 4:43. | mentions 4:43 Against — IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن سيده): Ibn Sida suspects the grain definition is a slip, since wine in its proper sense is grape juice alone. Against — ALUSI-FULL (author): Deriving “wine” from its covering the mind does not prove that the word covers every intoxicant; “star” likewise derives from appearing but names a particular star."}, {"id": "2:219/q04/p2", "position": "In its strict Arabic sense, khamr is fermented grape juice, sometimes including date juice; other intoxicants share its ruling by analogy or legal naming.", "reasons": "THALABI (سفيان الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وأكثر أهل الرأي): This legal school narrowly defines khamr as naturally fermented grape or date juice, without fire; other drinks are not khamr by name. THALABI (عيسى بن إبراهيم): Isa ibn Ibrahim says no nabidh is forbidden, raw or cooked, except strong raw grape juice that has not been watered and has transformed into wine. WAHIDI-BASIT (الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأكثر أهل الرأي): Al-Thawri, Abu Hanifa, and most jurists restrict khamr to grape or date juice that ferments naturally without fire; other drinks are not khamr. JISHUMI (ابن علية وبشر المريسي): Ibn ʿUlayya and Bishr al-Marisi say cooked grape juice becomes lawful after even minimal cooking. JISHUMI (جماعة): Another group says cooked grape juice is lawful once half of it has evaporated. JISHUMI (أبو حنيفة وجماعة من العلماء): Abu Hanifa and a group define wine as grape juice that ferments, boils, and throws up foam; they agree that this is wine. JISHUMI (author): The grape-specific definition is stronger: a Prophetic report distinguishes wine itself from intoxication in other drinks, and the grape definition has consensus while the broader one lacks proof. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Wine is not restricted to what is made from grapes or dates; the passage also names intoxicants from honey, wheat, and barley. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Wine is fermented grape juice that intensifies and foams; unboiled raisin or date infusion is also forbidden. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Prohibited wine in Medina was made from honey, raisins, dates, barley, and wheat; there was no grape wine there. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Strictly, wine is fermented grape juice uncooked or insufficiently cooked; other things that cloud reason are treated like it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن سيده): Ibn Sida suspects the grain definition is a slip, since wine in its proper sense is grape juice alone. TABRISI (أبو حنيفة): Abu Hanifa restricts khamr to grape juice once it ferments and becomes strong. RAZI-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abu Hanifa defines khamr narrowly as strong grape juice that has thrown up foam. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Wine is grape juice that ferments or is cooked; any other substance that intoxicates the intellect has the same legal status. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Khamr comes from covering; the name applies to fermented grape or date juice because it covers the mind, as sukr names what blocks it. NASAFI-FULL (author): Khamr is grape juice that boils, intensifies, and foams; its name means covering because it veils the mind. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Khamr is grape juice that has boiled, strengthened, and thrown up foam; it is named from covering because it veils the intellect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffāl gives a four-stage sequence for wine: the palm-and-grape verse, this verse, the prayer restriction, then final prohibition; gradualism eased a people accustomed to drinking. | mentions 16:67, 4:43, 5:90 SAMIN-DURR (author): Khamr properly denotes grape juice after fermentation and frothing; by metaphor it also covers any other liquid that ferments and froths. BURSEVI (author): Khamr is named from the root for covering: grape juice that boils, thickens, and foams covers the intellect and discernment, as though it were itself a veil. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام أبي حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa defines wine narrowly as grape juice that boils, ferments, and casts up foam; the term is explained as covering the mind, like a woman’s veil covers her face. ALUSI-FULL (أنس): Anas reports that grape wine was scarce when wine was prohibited and most of their wine came from unripe dates and dates. ALUSI-FULL (author): The disagreement is substantial: permitting grape wine is disbelief by consensus, while permitting other intoxicants is not, since their designation as wine is disputed and their prohibition is inferential. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام الأول والثاني): Abū Ḥanīfa and Abū Yūsuf permit drinks made from honey, figs, grains, or grape juice cooked down by two-thirds; Muḥammad and al-Shāfiʿī forbid them. ELMALILI (author): Grape wine and drinks made from it are intrinsically impure, and even a drop may not be consumed; impurity of other intoxicants is uncertain, so contact need not invalidate prayer. ELMALILI (author): Hamr originally means covering; specifically it names fermented grape juice after its foam subsides because it covers the intellect or clouds the head. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Medina mainly used date-based wine, imported grape wine from Yemen, Taif, and Syria, and also consumed intoxicating raisin/date infusions and drinks made from honey, corn, or barley; intoxicating varieties were called khamr. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (bazı lugatçılar): Some lexicographers restrict khamr to wine made from unboiled grape juice. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (bazı fıkıhçılar): Some jurists, following the narrow definition of khamr, held that every amount of grape wine is forbidden but other intoxicants are forbidden only in an intoxicating quantity. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith says khamr can be made from grape juice, raisins, dates, wheat, barley, or corn, and describes it as what clouds reason and intoxicates; no grading is stated."}, {"id": "2:219/q04/p3", "position": "Its name derives from mixing with the intellect.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): All intoxicants are khamr because they mix with and cover the intellect, whatever name they are given; drinkers are described as intoxicated or suffering a hangover. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): Some say it is named for being covered until maturity; Ibn al-Anbari derives the name from mixing with the intellect, illustrated by poems about illness mixing with the heart. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The mixing derivation returns to covering, since what mixes with something becomes like a veil. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Wine is any intoxicant that mixes with and overcomes the intellect. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (محمد بن القاسم): Three etymologies are reported: wine is called khamr because it mixes with the intellect, covers it, or veils it. RAZI-FULL (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says khamr is so named because it mixes with the intellect; Razi cites Kathir's verse using the phrase dāʾ mukhāmir as evidence for the sense of intermixture. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): A third etymology derives the name from mixing with the intellect, from mukhāmarah, “mixing.” QURTUBI-FULL (author): Qurtubi says the three explanations converge: wine matures, mixes with the intellect, then covers it; concealment is the root sense. SAMIN-DURR (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī derives khamr from its mingling with the mind, as in the phrase the disease mixed with him. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other proposed etymologies connect wine with covering, mixing with the mind, or being left until it matures; these accounts are close in sense, and the noun may be an agent, patient, or intensive verbal noun."}, {"id": "2:219/q04/p4", "position": "Its name derives from being covered or left until it ripens, ferments, or clarifies.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن المسيب): Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab explains the name wine by saying its clear part rises while its dregs sink. THALABI (أنس بن مالك): Anas says wine was named for being left in jars until it fermented and changed. THALABI (سعيد بن المسيب): Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab says wine was named because its surface cleared and its sediment settled when left to stand. QURTUBI-FULL (قيل): A second etymology connects khamr with being left to mature, as dough ferments or an opinion is left to become clear. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another derivation says wine is so called because it is covered and left until it ripens and strengthens. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other derivations invoke leaving dough or an opinion until it matures or becomes clear; on these derivations خمر began as a verbal noun used as an active or passive participle. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن المسيب): Ibn al-Musayyib gives an etymology for khamr, relating it to its clear top and turbid sediment. TABATABAI (author): The related words khimār, khammartu, and akhmartu refer respectively to a woman’s head covering, covering a vessel, and putting yeast into dough to make it rise."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
