<<chunk 29, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q05", "question": "What is the ruling on intoxicating drinks beyond grape wine?", "turns_on": "Whether every amount of every intoxicant is prohibited or non-grape drinks have a qualified allowance.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q05/p1", "position": "Every intoxicant is forbidden, even a little if much intoxicates.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says wine’s sin is that intoxication makes a person harm others, while gambling’s sin is withholding rights and injustice. TAB-FULL (author): Before prohibition, wine’s benefits included its price and the pleasure of drinking it. TAB-FULL (أبو القموص زيد بن علي): Abū al-Qamūṣ says wine was revealed about in three stages: after 2:219, some Muslims drank; two intoxicated men spoke incoherently in prayer, prompting 4:43, and another drinker later began lamenting the Badr dead. | mentions 4:43 TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says drinking continued after 2:219; an intoxicated recitation at ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf’s meal led to 4:43, and later a drunken dispute at Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ’s meal led to 5:90–91 and prohibition. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says the verse initially disparaged wine and gambling without banning them; 4:43 then prohibited drunkenness around prayer, and after al-Aḥzāb 5:90 prohibited wine in every amount, whether intoxicating or not. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 ZAJJAJ (author): All intoxicants are khamr because they mix with and cover the intellect, whatever name they are given; drinkers are described as intoxicated or suffering a hangover. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar recounts three stages: this verse, then the ban on approaching prayer intoxicated, then the final prohibition, which the Prophet announced as making wine forbidden. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports that people drank wine after the initial verse, then left it when the prohibition in al-Ma'ida was announced; their drink was date nabidh called fadikh. | mentions 5:90 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Wine is not linguistically identical to nabīdh; primary names are not assigned by analogy, as Abū al-Aswad’s poem calls wine its sister. THALABI (author): The source describes staged prohibition: an earlier Meccan verse mentioned intoxicating drink from dates and grapes, when Muslims still drank lawfully; 2:219 then identified the greater sin. | mentions 16:67 THALABI (author): At Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf's meal, companions became intoxicated; the prayer leader recited Surat al-Kafirun but omitted la, prompting the ban on prayer while drunk. | mentions 4:43 THALABI (علي): Ali reports that intoxicated Hamza slaughtered and ate Ali's camels, which Ali planned to sell to fund his marriage to Fatima; Hamza insulted Ali's lineage, and the Prophet compensated him. THALABI (سفيان الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وأكثر أهل الرأي): This legal school narrowly defines khamr as naturally fermented grape or date juice, without fire; other drinks are not khamr by name. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Burda ibn Sahl reports the Prophet told people to drink from vessels but not to become intoxicated. THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن السدي): Al-Suddi calls that hadith munkar: Abu al-Ahwas erred, Samak's companions did not rely on him, and Samak was weak and accepted prompting. THALABI (أحمد): Ahmad says Abu al-Ahwas erred; Sharik differs in chain and wording, reporting that the Prophet prohibited several vessel types. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi understands these reports to concern a nonintoxicating remainder; he cites Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz's order and rule that every intoxicant is forbidden. THALABI (عمر بن عبد العزيز): Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz told officials not to drink tala until two-thirds evaporated and added that every intoxicant is forbidden. THALABI (عيسى بن إبراهيم): Isa ibn Ibrahim says no nabidh is forbidden, raw or cooked, except strong raw grape juice that has not been watered and has transformed into wine. THALABI (الإمام أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman says the Qursafa report is unestablished and Qursafa unidentified; the better-known Aisha report rejects every intoxicant, even if made from bread. THALABI (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas is cited as saying both little and much wine are forbidden, as is any intoxicant in any drink. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi says the broad rule is more correct: Ibn Abbas held whatever intoxicates is forbidden and said nabidh should be prohibited as God and His Messenger prohibited. THALABI (ابن عباس): Asked about bazidh, Ibn Abbas says whatever intoxicates is forbidden. THALABI (ابن عباس): Abu al-Hakam reports Ibn Abbas saying whoever wants to prohibit what God and His Messenger prohibited should prohibit nabidh. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report attributed to Ibn Umar describes the Prophet tasting strong nabidh, returning it, diluting it with water, and telling people to weaken drinks in those vessels with water. THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman says the well-known Abd al-Malik report conflicts with al-Zubayr's version: Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying every intoxicant is forbidden and every intoxicant is wine. THALABI (ابن عمر): Ibn Sirin reports Ibn Umar saying intoxicants are forbidden in small and large amounts; another report says to avoid anything containing an intoxicating element. THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman grades the Ibn Masud story about diluted nabidh at the Kaaba as weak because Yahya ibn Yaman alone reports it from Sufyan and has poor accuracy and memory. THALABI (إبراهيم): A report says Ibrahim tested a thick melon drink and removed or discarded its intoxicating element. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abu Hurayra reports that the Prophet rejected gourd nabidh after it began to ferment, calling it the drink of one who does not believe in God and the Last Day. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): A report attributed to Abu Rafi says Umar instructed people to dilute nabidh if they feared it was too strong. THALABI (عبد الله بن المبارك): Ibn al-Mubarak interprets Umar's instruction to dilute as applying before the drink becomes strong; Umar imposed the full penalty after finding a drink intoxicating. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): Umar says he would impose the full penalty if a man's tala was intoxicating, and the source reports that he did so after smelling the drink. THALABI (إبراهيم): Ibrahim is reported to have said there is no objection to melon nabidh. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi says reports may predate prohibition or, more likely, concern date- or raisin-infused water before it fermented and intoxicated. THALABI (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports the Prophet drank prepared nabidh on the day it was made and on the next two days, supporting that it was not yet intoxicating. THALABI (أم سلمة): Anas reports Umm Salama had a vessel and said she served the Prophet water, honey, milk, and nabidh. THALABI (طلحة بن مصرف): Talha ibn Musarrif warned that nabidh makes the young grow and the old age, but said he disliked Muslims becoming intoxicated through his practice. THALABI (ابن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq told Abu Ishaq that Ali's and Abdullah's companions served nabidh in the khawafi before Talha was born. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Ibn Burayda reports the Prophet first forbade a group to drink from unsealed vessels; after they fell ill and blamed the restriction, he permitted drinking but said every intoxicant is forbidden. THALABI (قالوا): They explain the warning as targeting wine that causes intoxication, since nabidh's excitement and energy arise only from an intoxicating drink. THALABI (جابر): Abu al-Zubayr reports from Jabir that the Prophet had nabidh prepared for him in a vessel. THALABI (author): These reports show that nabidh is raisin or date infusion before it ferments. THALABI (مالك والشافعي وأحمد بن حنبل وأبو ثور وأكثر أهل الآثار): They define wine as every intoxicating drink, whether grape-based or otherwise, and forbid any amount; its drinker receives the penalty except for the specified cooked drink after a third evaporates, whose testimony remains valid. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet is reported to say that every intoxicant is wine and every wine is forbidden. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says every intoxicant is wine and whatever intoxicates in a large quantity is forbidden even in a small quantity. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha reports that if a large vessel of a drink intoxicates, even a handful of it is forbidden; the vessel called gharaq holds sixteen ratls. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Aisha reports the Prophet saying that every intoxicant is forbidden from its beginning to its end. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet names intoxicating drinks made from dates, grapes, raisins, honey, wheat, barley, and corn, and forbids every intoxicant. THALABI (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar forbids both small and large amounts of intoxicants, and identifies the named drinks made by his family and the people of Khaybar as wine. THALABI (عبادة بن الصامت): The Prophet warns, according to Ubadah ibn al-Samit, that people from his community will declare wine lawful by giving it another name. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A second prophetic report says wine is forbidden because of its intoxicating substance, not its name, and every drink whose end result is wine is forbidden. THALABI (حكيم من حكماء العرب): An Arab sage explains that he will not drink nabidh because God gave him a sound mind and he will not admit what damages it. WAHIDI-BASIT (مالك والشافعي وأحمد وأهل الأثر): Malik, al-Shafiʿi, Ahmad, and hadith scholars define khamr as every intoxicating drink, from juice or infusion, cooked or raw; the author says Arabic supports this view. WAHIDI-BASIT (الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأكثر أهل الرأي): Al-Thawri, Abu Hanifa, and most jurists restrict khamr to grape or date juice that ferments naturally without fire; other drinks are not khamr. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says every into
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
