<<chunk 29, part 3 of 0..5>>
. TABATABAI (author): The impairment of perception and intellect during intoxication and afterward is undeniable, is wine’s greatest sin and corruption, and generates its other corruptions. TABATABAI (author): Actions and policies built on intoxication and lies threaten humanity and undermine happiness; a law grounded in reason and barring desire that corrupts it is a source of honor. TABATABAI (author): Because sensual habits spread quickly and are hard to abandon, God legislates gradually and gently; wine prohibition is one example of that progressive approach. TABATABAI (author): Meccan 16:67 mentions intoxicating drink and good provision; al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī treats this as an early, non-explicit stage in wine’s gradual prohibition. | mentions 16:67 TABATABAI (أحدهما عليهما السلام): One of the two Imams says no act disobeys God more severely than drinking intoxicants, which can lead an unaware drinker to abandon prayer and commit incest. TABATABAI (author): Khamr linguistically means any liquid made to intoxicate; its root sense is covering, since it veils the mind and its ability to distinguish good from evil. TABATABAI (author): Arabs originally knew wine made from grapes, dates, and barley; later varieties multiplied and all intoxicating kinds, across levels of potency, are khamr. ASAD-NOTES (author): Although this verse says their evil outweighs their benefit, Asad points to the clear prohibition of intoxicants and games of chance in 5:90–91. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The prohibition unfolded in stages: an early Meccan notice of fruit benefits, then a ban on praying while intoxicated, this comparison of harms and benefits, and finally categorical prohibition. | mentions 16:67, 4:43, 5:90 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Islam forbids intoxicating drinks and drugs with comparable or greater effects because their harms outweigh limited benefits that can be obtained elsewhere. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Medina mainly used date-based wine, imported grape wine from Yemen, Taif, and Syria, and also consumed intoxicating raisin/date infusions and drinks made from honey, corn, or barley; intoxicating varieties were called khamr. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): In Arabic, khamr commonly names all these intoxicating drinks. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (bazı fıkıhçılar): Some jurists, following the narrow definition of khamr, held that every amount of grape wine is forbidden but other intoxicants are forbidden only in an intoxicating quantity. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): After later assessment ended the disagreement, all recognized Islamic legal schools agreed that every amount of any intoxicant is forbidden and may not be consumed. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith says that a small quantity is forbidden when a large quantity of the substance intoxicates; no grading is stated. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith says khamr can be made from grape juice, raisins, dates, wheat, barley, or corn, and describes it as what clouds reason and intoxicates; no grading is stated. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith states that every intoxicant is khamr and every intoxicant is forbidden; no grading is stated. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Pre-Islamic Arabs prized wine’s intoxication and pleasure and gambling’s entertainment, excitement, hospitality, and aid to the poor, while overlooking the harms. STUDYQURAN (author): The prohibition of drinking wine is discussed at 4:43. | mentions 4:43 STUDYQURAN (author): Later legal philosophy treated protecting intelligence as one of the Law’s essential objectives, partly through its ruling on intoxication. STUDYQURAN (author): Although the verse names wine, Islamic law applies the ruling to every alcoholic drink. STUDYQURAN (author): Intoxication damages reason and judgment, causes quarrels, violence and promiscuity, and makes people forget God’s remembrance."}, {"id": "2:219/q05/p2", "position": "Some non-grape drinks or a non-intoxicating small amount are permitted under stated conditions.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (أبو الأسود الدؤلي): After someone claimed a differently named intoxicant was lawful, Abū al-Aswad recognized it as wine’s kin; his poem says the two are siblings nurtured by the same mother. THALABI (سفيان الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وأكثر أهل الرأي): They say cooked juice is lawful though disliked after two-thirds evaporate; when two-thirds evaporate and one-third remains, drinking and selling are allowed unless intoxicating. THALABI (قرصافة عن عائشة): They also invoke a report attributed to Aisha through Qursafa that permits drinking if one does not become intoxicated. THALABI (سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib identifies the drink Umar permitted as one cooked until two-thirds evaporated and one-third remained. THALABI (عائشة): Jisra bint Dajaja reports Aisha repeatedly saying she does not permit an intoxicant, even if made from bread, when asked about alternating batches of nabidh. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi says the tala granted as a concession is reb cooked down to one-third, after intoxication, harm, and devilish influence have gone. THALABI (ابن المبارك): Ibn al-Mubarak says he found no sound authority permitting intoxicants except Ibrahim. THALABI (ابن شبرمة): Ibn Shubruma says God have mercy on Ibrahim: he made people strict about nabidh while also permitting it. JISHUMI (author): Among other grape drinks, juice cooked briefly cannot be drunk or sold; the half-cooked type may be sold but not drunk, while reducing it by two-thirds permits sale and drinking subject to the stated exception for amusement and intoxication. KASHSHAF-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abu Hanifa and some of his followers allow boiled raisin or date drink after two thirds evaporate and it ferments, provided one drinks below intoxication without seeking amusement. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو حنيفة وسفيان الثوري وابن أبي ليلى وابن شبرمة وجماعة من فقهاء الكوفة): They allow a non-grape drink in a non-intoxicating amount even if much intoxicates; a person drunk without intending to reach drunkenness incurs no hadd. RAZI-FULL (author): The question does not specify whether it asks what wine and gambling are, whether they may be used, or whether drinking is lawful; the answer about sin implies a question about permissibility. RAZI-FULL (الخطابي): Al-Khattabi argues the betʿ report refutes permissive interpretations of nabidh and the claim that a small quantity of an intoxicant is lawful: the categorical answer covers the whole class and all amounts. BAYDAWI-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa permits drinking fermented raisin or date infusion if boiled until two-thirds evaporates, provided the drinker does not become intoxicated. NASAFI-FULL (author): The author recounts the stages: the first Meccan verse (16:67) allowed intoxicants; after Umar and others asked about wine’s harm, this verse followed. Some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 BIQAI-FULL (author): Wine was then allowed during the night of fasting; people commonly drank date and raisin nabīdh, which could ferment in the hot climate. BURSEVI (author): That spiritual drink quiets appetites; hearts are absorbed in ecstasies, spirits in witnessing, and secrets in the glimpse of beauty, so it is beneficial and lawful. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi laments that contemporary drinkers favor intoxicants other than grape wine, inventing names such as amberiyya and iksīr to imagine the new names make them lawful. ALUSI-FULL (أبي حنيفة وأبي يوسف): Abū Ḥanīfa and Abū Yūsuf permit lightly cooked date or raisin nabīdh, even when fermented, if the amount is thought not to intoxicate and is drunk without revelry. ELMALILI (Ebû Hanîfe): Abū Ḥanīfa held that a small amount of non-grape intoxicant could be drunk for strength if it did not intoxicate and was not consumed to imitate immoral people or unbelievers. Against — THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن السدي): Al-Suddi calls that hadith munkar: Abu al-Ahwas erred, Samak's companions did not rely on him, and Samak was weak and accepted prompting. Against — THALABI (أحمد): Ahmad says Abu al-Ahwas erred; Sharik differs in chain and wording, reporting that the Prophet prohibited several vessel types. Against — THALABI (الإمام أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman says the Qursafa report is unestablished and Qursafa unidentified; the better-known Aisha report rejects every intoxicant, even if made from bread. Against — THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman says the well-known Abd al-Malik report conflicts with al-Zubayr's version: Ibn Umar reports the Prophet saying every intoxicant is forbidden and every intoxicant is wine. Against — THALABI (أبو عبد الرحمن): Abu Abd al-Rahman grades the Ibn Masud story about diluted nabidh at the Kaaba as weak because Yahya ibn Yaman alone reports it from Sufyan and has poor accuracy and memory. Against — IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn Atiyya calls the Kufan position weak, saying reason and Abu Bakr, Umar, and the Companions oppose it. Against — QURTUBI-FULL (أبو حنيفة والثوري وابن أبي ليلى وابن شبرمة وفقهاء الكوفة): These Kufan jurists allow small amounts of non-grape drinks that intoxicate in large amounts and deny the penalty absent deliberate intoxication; Qurtubi calls this weak and rejects it by reason and transmitted evidence."}, {"id": "2:219/q05/p3", "position": "Medicinal necessity may allow use.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Medicinal treatment follows the Qurʾanic concession for necessity, including needs treated as necessities. | mentions 2:173, 6:145, 16:115"}]}
{"id": "2:219/q06", "question": "When does cooked or infused drink become lawful or forbidden?", "turns_on": "The stage of cooking or fermentation that removes prohibition, and whether intoxication remains decisive.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q06/p1", "position": "Fresh, non-intoxicating infusion or sufficiently reduced drink is permissible.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports that people drank wine after the initial verse, then left it when the prohibition in al-Ma'ida
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
