<<chunk 29, part 5 of 0..5>>
ed them with water and clay; rain later revealed wine's color and smell in Medina's streets for a time. BURSEVI (المفسرون): At ʿItbān ibn Mālik's feast, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ recited a poem insulting the Anṣār and praising his clan; a guest struck and wounded Saʿd with a camel's jawbone, after which Saʿd complained to the Messenger. BURSEVI (author): As outward wine comes from grapes, dates, raisins, and grains, inward wine comes from heedlessness, desire, caprice, and love of the world; these intoxicate the human soul and intellect and are sinful. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام أبي حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa defines wine narrowly as grape juice that boils, ferments, and casts up foam; the term is explained as covering the mind, like a woman’s veil covers her face. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام أبي حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa regards boiling as the beginning of fermentation and foam rising and settling as its completion; legal consequences attach to completion, as with the fixed penalty and sale prohibition. ALUSI-FULL (author): Cooking cannot erase an already established prohibition; however, a cooked drink is not subject to the fixed penalty until it intoxicates, since that penalty for a small amount applies specifically to raw wine. ALUSI-FULL (author): Raw date infusion, called sakar, is forbidden; the author invokes the Companions’ consensus and the verse’s initial, pre-prohibition setting. | mentions 16:67 ALUSI-FULL (شريك): Sharik argues date infusion must be permitted because the verse mentions it as a favor, which could not be forbidden; the author rejects this using consensus and the verse’s earlier setting. | mentions 16:67 ALUSI-FULL (قيل): One reading takes the verse about date produce as a rebuke: people make intoxicating drink from it and leave wholesome provision. | mentions 16:67 ALUSI-FULL (الأوزاعي): Raw raisin infusion is forbidden once it ferments and boils, though al-Awzāʿī disputes the ruling. TABATABAI (النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A prophetic report says a wine drinker will receive an equal measure of boiling punishment in the afterlife, whether forgiven or punished, and describes the drinker's appearance on Judgment Day. TABATABAI (author): The threats in the wine reports may be supported by the Qur'anic description of the sinner's food and boiling punishment. | mentions 44:43-49 TABATABAI (author): The related words khimār, khammartu, and akhmartu refer respectively to a woman’s head covering, covering a vessel, and putting yeast into dough to make it rise. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Medina mainly used date-based wine, imported grape wine from Yemen, Taif, and Syria, and also consumed intoxicating raisin/date infusions and drinks made from honey, corn, or barley; intoxicating varieties were called khamr. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (bazı lugatçılar): Some lexicographers restrict khamr to wine made from unboiled grape juice. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Hz. Peygamber): A cited hadith says khamr can be made from grape juice, raisins, dates, wheat, barley, or corn, and describes it as what clouds reason and intoxicates; no grading is stated."}, {"id": "2:219/q06/p2", "position": "Grape or other cooked juice is permitted after two thirds evaporate, subject to intoxication conditions.", "reasons": "THALABI (سفيان الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وأكثر أهل الرأي): They say cooked juice is lawful though disliked after two-thirds evaporate; when two-thirds evaporate and one-third remains, drinking and selling are allowed unless intoxicating. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): Ibn Sirin reports Umar told an official to cook the drink until two-thirds evaporated, leaving one share for people and removing the devil's two shares. THALABI (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports a story that Noah and Satan disputed ownership of the grapevine and settled that Noah would have one-third and Satan two-thirds. THALABI (سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib identifies the drink Umar permitted as one cooked until two-thirds evaporated and one-third remained. THALABI (موسى الأموي): Musa al-Umawi is reported to have drunk tala after two-thirds evaporated and one-third remained. THALABI (سعيد بن المسيب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib says tala cooked down to one-third is unobjectionable; al-Miswar agrees. THALABI (عمر بن عبد العزيز): Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz told officials not to drink tala until two-thirds evaporated and added that every intoxicant is forbidden. THALABI (أبو سعيد): Abu Said defines tala as a drink cooked until two-thirds evaporate; the name reflects its dark thickness like camel ointment. THALABI (author): Al-Thaʿlabi says the tala granted as a concession is reb cooked down to one-third, after intoxication, harm, and devilish influence have gone. JISHUMI (أبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وسفيان الثوري وجماعة): Abu Hanifa, Abu Yusuf, Sufyan al-Thawri, and others permit it when two-thirds have evaporated and one-third remains; this is also reported from several early authorities. KASHSHAF-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abu Hanifa and some of his followers allow boiled raisin or date drink after two thirds evaporate and it ferments, provided one drinks below intoxication without seeking amusement. BAYDAWI-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa permits drinking fermented raisin or date infusion if boiled until two-thirds evaporates, provided the drinker does not become intoxicated. ALUSI-FULL (author): Bādhq and munṣaf, grape must cooked until less than two-thirds evaporates, are forbidden if fermented and foaming; al-Alusi says their thinness, intoxication, and pleasure attract sinners, so they are banned to prevent corruption. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام الأول والثاني): Abū Ḥanīfa and Abū Yūsuf permit drinks made from honey, figs, grains, or grape juice cooked down by two-thirds; Muḥammad and al-Shāfiʿī forbid them."}, {"id": "2:219/q06/p3", "position": "Any amount of a drink whose large amount intoxicates remains forbidden despite cooking.", "reasons": "THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet names intoxicating drinks made from dates, grapes, raisins, honey, wheat, barley, and corn, and forbids every intoxicant. WAHIDI-BASIT (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet lists intoxicants made from dates, grapes, raisins, wheat, barley, and corn, then prohibits every intoxicant. JISHUMI (محمد ومالك والشافعي): Muhammad, Malik, and al-Shafiʿi hold that any drink, raw or cooked, is forbidden in small amounts if large amounts intoxicate. ALUSI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم): In the Ṣaḥīḥayn the Prophet answers a question about honey nabīdh that every intoxicating drink is forbidden; Abū Dāwūd reports his prohibition of every intoxicant and stupefier."}, {"id": "2:219/q06/p4", "position": "Even slight cooking suffices.", "reasons": "THALABI (إسماعيل بن علية وجماعة من أهل العراق): Some say even slight cooking makes juice tala; Ismail ibn Ulayya and a group of Iraqis hold this view. JISHUMI (ابن علية وبشر المريسي): Ibn ʿUlayya and Bishr al-Marisi say cooked grape juice becomes lawful after even minimal cooking. ALUSI-FULL (أبي حنيفة وأبي يوسف): Abū Ḥanīfa and Abū Yūsuf permit lightly cooked date or raisin nabīdh, even when fermented, if the amount is thought not to intoxicate and is drunk without revelry. ALUSI-FULL (محمد والشافعي): Muḥammad and al-Shāfiʿī forbid lightly cooked date or raisin nabīdh even in the restricted quantity described by Abū Ḥanīfa and Abū Yūsuf."}, {"id": "2:219/q06/p5", "position": "Cooking away one half suffices.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (جماعة): Another group says cooked grape juice is lawful once half of it has evaporated. JISHUMI (author): Among other grape drinks, juice cooked briefly cannot be drunk or sold; the half-cooked type may be sold but not drunk, while reducing it by two-thirds permits sale and drinking subject to the stated exception for amusement and intoxication."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
