<<chunk 30, part 3 of 0..4>>
e those with blank arrows got no meat and paid nothing. Outsiders were called burma, while the players were called aysar. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The original Arab form of maysir involved wealthy men buying and slaughtering a camel and dividing its meat by lots drawn for ten shares: seven marked lots awarded one through seven portions and three blank lots. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The game used ten marked arrows, with seven assigned shares and three blanks; a slaughtered camel was divided into ten portions or, in another account, twenty-eight, then a just person drew arrows to assign shares and losers paid the full cost. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Maysir derives from y-s-r in the sense of slaughtering; yāsir means the slaughterer, and the camel subject to the draw was called maysir, then the arrows by association. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid’s intended sense was slaughter; a yāsir is someone who participates in drawing lots, plural aysār (also described as yusr). IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Arabs used this practice in winter scarcity and severe cold: participants guaranteed the camel’s price, slaughtered it, and divided it into ten portions; al-Aṣmaʿī’s claim of twenty-eight portions is mistaken. TABRISI (author): Another derivation links maysir to division: whatever is divided is yassartahu; yāsir and maysir can also name the camel being divided. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): In winter hardship, wealthy men slaughtered a camel and divided it into shares by drawing arrows; winners gave shares to the needy, the benefit named in the verse, and people praised participation and condemned refusal. RAZI-FULL (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba derives maysir from apportioning: the camel is named for being divided, the butcher for portioning it, and gamblers are called yasirun because they divide its meat. QURTUBI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azhari says maysir can name the camel gambled over because it is divided into shares; anything divided is described with the same root. QURTUBI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azhari says yāsir originally means the butcher who portions the camel; by extension it names the arrow players and gamblers who cause the slaughter. QURTUBI-FULL (الصحاح): Al-Sihah records that “the people yasara the camel” means they slaughtered it and divided its portions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The name maysir is variously derived from ease, affluence because gambling strips it away, something becoming due, or slaughtering and cutting up a camel. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Arabs played in winter hardship to provide for the poor: the players bought and slaughtered a camel, dividing it into ten shares according to Abu Amr or twenty-eight according to al-Asma'i. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عطية): Another derivation links maysir to yasar, slaughtering or cutting: a yāsir is the butcher who divides a camel. Ibn ʿAṭiyya says the camel staked for lots was called maysir as the source of gain, then the arrows took that name by proximity. BIQAI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azhari derives maysir from dividing the staked camel into shares; yāsir first meant the butcher who apportioned its meat, then the gamblers who caused the slaughter. BIQAI-FULL (القزاز): Al-Qazzaz calls the gamblers collectively yusr, with an individual yāsir; he also uses yusr for an arrow thrower and maysir for dice, but not chess because its meaning differs. BIQAI-FULL (أبو عبد الله): Abu Abd Allah describes buying and slaughtering a camel, then dividing it into portions. BIQAI-FULL (القاموس): Al-Qamus says gamblers bought a camel on credit, slaughtered it, and divided it into 28 shares or ten portions; the winning arrows took shares while blank arrows incurred the cost. BIQAI-FULL (author): A camel was slaughtered and apportioned into ten shares: the haunches, rump, withers, chest, back, shoulders, and thighs were divided, with neck and loose skin shared evenly. BIQAI-FULL (author): The leftover bone or meat was called al-raym, a surplus beyond the load, and the butcher took it; sellers might also reserve parts, usually the extremities and head. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir derives from taking money easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due; the gambler was called yasir because he won a share of the slaughtered camel. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir is a verbal noun on the pattern of mawʿid or marjiʿ, used for gambling; its derivation may refer to taking wealth easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due."}, {"id": "2:219/q10/p2", "position": "Its verbal form and related names for gamblers and arrows follow Arabic root usage.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Aʿshā ibn Thaʿlaba’s camel-wager poem, beginning “wa-jazūru aysārin,” illustrates the camel meat won in maysir. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Maysir means gambling and is connected to the expression yasara lī, meaning that a thing came easily or was attainable. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The player with arrows was called a yāsir; the term was then applied to the gambler. MAWARDI-FULL (الشاعر): An unnamed poet likens himself to a cheated yāsir turning the arrows, illustrating the gambling sense. WAHIDI-BASIT (طرفة): Ṭarafa’s verse uses aysār as the plural of yusr for participants in the lot-based camel gamble. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأعرابي): Ibn al-Aʿrabi explains yasara al-yāsir as bringing one’s arrow to gamble. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Scholars agree all gambling is forbidden; the verse names maysir as an example, though strictly maysir applies to gambling over camels. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba derives the word from yāsara, drawing lots with arrows; the person who draws is called yāsir, yāsirūn, yusr, or aysār. RAZI-FULL (author): Maysir means gambling and is the verbal noun of yasara, as mawʿid and marjiʿ derive from their verbs; yassartuhu means I gambled it. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi reports disagreement over whether maysir names the camel-arrow game alone or all gambling. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The verb yassara means to gamble; yasir and yasir both mean gambler, and their plural is aysār. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Nābigha and Ṭarafa use aysār for the people who draw lots for a camel and distribute its meat shares. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Maysir means gambling and follows the pattern maf'il from yasara, as maw'id derives from wa'ada; yasartu al-maysir means I gambled. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Yusr, the participant in drawing lots, has plural aysār; another analysis makes yusr a plural of yāsir, like ḥāris and ḥaras. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Maysir first named pre-Islamic Arab gambling; in law it covers every form of gambling, whose prohibition is agreed. SAMIN-DURR (author): Maysir means gambling and is formed on mifʿal from yusr/yasara-yaysiru. Alqama's line uses ييسرون and another poet's uses ييسرونني as usage evidence. SAMIN-DURR (author): The participant in drawing lots is called yusr and pluralized as أيسار; another account treats يسر as a plural of ياسر, like حرس from حارس. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The report is transmitted by Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, and al-Nasa’i through Israel from Abu Ishaq, and by Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Mardawayh through al-Thawri; Abu Zurʿa says Abu Maysara did not hear from ʿUmar, while Ibn al-Madini calls the chain sound and al-Tirmidhi authenticates it. BIQAI-FULL (صاحب كتاب الزينة): The lexicon gives yusr as the plural of yāsir and aysār as the plural of yusr, illustrating a plural formed from another plural. BIQAI-FULL (author): Continuing al-Azhari's lexical entry, the text records yasar al-qawm for gambling and yāsir or yusr for a gambler, with aysār as the plural. BIQAI-FULL (القزاز): Al-Qazzaz gives forms for the person who gambles and the camel staked in the game, and records aysāʾ as a plural of yusr. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says al-maysir means gambling and derives its name from gamblers' phrase aysara jazuran, meaning to stake a camel. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Maysir was named alongside wine because it was entertainment and supplied meat to eat with wine. STUDYQURAN (author): Maysir literally names one form of gambling, while qimār is the broader term for gambling generally."}, {"id": "2:219/q10/p3", "position": "It comes from ease or effortless gain, or the loss of ease or wealth.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Maysir was named from their phrase yassirū lanā thamana al-jazūr, meaning make the camel's price easy for us. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Maysir is a verbal noun for gambling, deriving either from ease because it takes wealth effortlessly or from yasar because it strips away wealth. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Maysir is a verbal noun like mawʿid; gambling is so called because it takes another’s wealth easily or strips away prosperity. NASAFI-FULL (author): Maysir is gambling, from يسر; it may be named for taking wealth easily without effort or for depriving someone of wealth. SAMIN-DURR (author): One derivation takes maysir from ease, because winnings are easy to obtain; another derives it from wealth, since gambling strips a person of wealth. BURSEVI (author): Maisir is a verbal noun from yasara; it may be named for taking wealth easily without labor or for impoverishing the loser. ELMALILI (author): Maysir is a verbal noun from yusr or yasar meaning gambling, associated with acquiring or transferring wealth easily and without effort. TABATABAI (author): Maysir means gambling and yāsir means gambler; its root connotes ease because it acquires another’s property without the toil of earning."}, {"id": "2:219/q10/p4", "position": "It comes from a share or stake becoming due through the arrows.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): Maysir is linked to yasara, meaning something became due; a yāsir is the lot-caster. Al-Nabigha and another poet use yāsir for a gambler. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Maysir is a mafʿil from yasara, to become due; yāsir is one whose lot or wager becomes due, then the terms meant gambling and gambler. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Al-Maysir means gambling; it derives from yassara li, something becoming due, and the gambler is called yāsir or yasir. TABRISI (aut
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
