<<chunk 30, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:219/q07", "question": "What penalty or other legal consequences follow drinking wine?", "turns_on": "The reported prophetic practice and later juristic choice of fixed or discretionary punishment.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q07/p1", "position": "Other consequences depend on drink, intoxication, and the kind of wine.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the passage was superseded by three verses in al-Māʾida and discusses the Prophet’s wine punishment: he treated it as a hadd by his judgment, not a fixed, named hadd. | mentions 5:90 THALABI (عبد الله بن المبارك): Ibn al-Mubarak interprets Umar's instruction to dilute as applying before the drink becomes strong; Umar imposed the full penalty after finding a drink intoxicating. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): Umar says he would impose the full penalty if a man's tala was intoxicating, and the source reports that he did so after smelling the drink. THALABI (مالك والشافعي وأحمد بن حنبل وأبو ثور وأكثر أهل الآثار): They define wine as every intoxicating drink, whether grape-based or otherwise, and forbid any amount; its drinker receives the penalty except for the specified cooked drink after a third evaporates, whose testimony remains valid. WAHIDI-BASIT (ثعلب): Thaʿlab transmits that khāmir can mean one who conceals testimony; the root sense is covering, also reflected in the Prophetic instruction to cover vessels. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Their sin is the punishment incurred by consuming wine and gambling; it outweighs benefits such as pleasure, merriment, socializing, gifts, gambling gains, and boasting over abstainers. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The community agrees fermented grape wine that froths is forbidden in all amounts, and the hadd applies to small and large amounts. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الأمة): Most jurists forbid any amount of another drink if a larger amount intoxicates, and require the hadd for it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو حنيفة وسفيان الثوري وابن أبي ليلى وابن شبرمة وجماعة من فقهاء الكوفة): They allow a non-grape drink in a non-intoxicating amount even if much intoxicates; a person drunk without intending to reach drunkenness incurs no hadd. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جماعة من العلماء): A group of scholars required a non-severe beating, such that the striker’s armpit would not show. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مالك): Mālik says every flogging should use the same force, without easing it or striking excessively. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): There is consensus to avoid striking the face, genitals, heart, brain, and flanks of the person flogged. QURTUBI-FULL (author): He then cites the command to avoid wine, gambling, idols, and divining arrows as satanic impurity. | mentions 5:90 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Abū Miḥjan famously wished to be buried by a vine; ʿUmar repeatedly flogged him for drinking and exiled him, later ordering Saʿd to detain him, but released him from chains after his courage at al-Qādisiyya. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو محجن الثقفي): After ʿUmar released him, Abū Miḥjan vowed never to drink again and kept the vow; another version says he drank when the penalty purified him but stopped once he was disgraced. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور الأمة): The majority hold that any drink whose large quantity intoxicates is forbidden in both small and large quantities, and that the prescribed penalty applies. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو حنيفة والثوري وابن أبي ليلى وابن شبرمة وفقهاء الكوفة): These Kufan jurists allow small amounts of non-grape drinks that intoxicate in large amounts and deny the penalty absent deliberate intoxication; Qurtubi calls this weak and rejects it by reason and transmitted evidence. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): This verse does not address jurisprudential details such as other intoxicants, the drinker’s prescribed penalty, how flogging is done, or places to avoid striking; those belong to fiqh. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read إثم كثير (“many sins”); the majority read كبير (“great sin”). كثرة can refer to many offenders, cumulative punishment, many sinful acts, or the many parties involved in wine. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī explains the comparison as the punishment of sin exceeding the pleasures, social advantages, and winnings associated with drinking and gambling. SAMIN-DURR (author): The much-sin reading may describe the many individual sins of drinkers and gamblers, or the repeated and multiplied punishment resulting from their acts. ALUSI-FULL (author): One who denies wine’s intrinsic prohibition and says only its intoxicating effect is forbidden is an unbeliever for rejecting scripture, which calls it impurity; the cited verse is 5:90. | mentions 5:90 ALUSI-FULL (author): Cooking cannot erase an already established prohibition; however, a cooked drink is not subject to the fixed penalty until it intoxicates, since that penalty for a small amount applies specifically to raw wine. ALUSI-FULL (author): Grape wine itself is forbidden independently of intoxication, so all amounts, even a drop, are forbidden and its drinker is liable to the fixed penalty. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi’s preferred rule is that any non-grape drink is forbidden if it can intoxicate an unaccustomed drinker; a small amount is like a large one, and drinking incurs the penalty, divorce effect, and severe impurity. ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden. ELMALILI (author): Grape wine and drinks made from it are intrinsically impure, and even a drop may not be consumed; impurity of other intoxicants is uncertain, so contact need not invalidate prayer. TABATABAI (author): The Qur’an calls killing, concealing testimony, and false accusation sin, but does not call these great sins; it calls wine’s sin great and describes shirk as a great sin. | mentions 4:48 TABATABAI (النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): A prophetic report says a wine drinker will receive an equal measure of boiling punishment in the afterlife, whether forgiven or punished, and describes the drinker's appearance on Judgment Day. TABATABAI (author): The threats in the wine reports may be supported by the Qur'anic description of the sinner's food and boiling punishment. | mentions 44:43-49"}, {"id": "2:219/q07/p2", "position": "Eighty lashes are the juristic rule or ʿUmar’s later measure.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): As drinking spread, ʿUmar raised the penalty to eighty as the lightest fixed penalty; Mālik agreed, while al-Shāfiʿī held to forty. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Abū Miḥjan famously wished to be buried by a vine; ʿUmar repeatedly flogged him for drinking and exiled him, later ordering Saʿd to detain him, but released him from chains after his courage at al-Qādisiyya."}, {"id": "2:219/q07/p3", "position": "Forty lashes are the reported prophetic measure or the juristic rule.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The only preserved Prophetic practice on the wine penalty is forty lashes, reported by Muslim and Abū Dāwūd. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Another report says the Prophet administered an unspecified general beating; Abū Bakr estimated it at forty, followed by Abū Bakr and ʿUmar. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): As drinking spread, ʿUmar raised the penalty to eighty as the lightest fixed penalty; Mālik agreed, while al-Shāfiʿī held to forty."}, {"id": "2:219/q07/p4", "position": "A discretionary or unspecified beating is reported.", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Another report says the Prophet administered an unspecified general beating; Abū Bakr estimated it at forty, followed by Abū Bakr and ʿUmar. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جماعة من العلماء): A group of scholars required a non-severe beating, such that the striker’s armpit would not show. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مالك): Mālik says every flogging should use the same force, without easing it or striking excessively."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q08", "question": "What does ٱلْمَيْسِرِ include?", "turns_on": "Whether maysir names the original camel lottery, every wager, or also unwagered games; cited exceptions matter.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q08/p1", "position": "Maysir encompasses gambling and wagers generally, including various games and children’s play where applicable.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Maysir means gambling; its name is linked to the expression aysiru, meaning to slaughter or divide an animal, as in a wager to put up set amounts. MUQATIL (author): The verse was revealed concerning Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Umar ibn al-Khattab, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and several Helpers; maysir means gambling. MUQATIL (author): In the gambling game, a group bought a camel by shares and drew lots; the person whose lot came out paid the whole price but received no meat, which the others divided. MAJAZ (author): Al-maysir means gambling. ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): Qatada defines al-maysir as gambling. ABDURRAZZAQ (مجاهد وسعيد): Mujahid and Saʿid define all gambling as maysir, including children’s game of walnuts. ABDURRAZZAQ (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud warns against playing with dice or knucklebones, calling them a form of gambling. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): Al-maysir means gambling; Ibn Qutayba refers readers to his discussion of its benefit in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid identifies the benefits of maysir as the portions of the camel won in gambling. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says wine’s benefits were pleasure and price, while maysir’s were its gambling winnings. TAB-FULL (author): The verse was revealed before explicit prohibition, and the sin attributed to wine and maysir is the sin caused by them, not a later sin of violating the ban. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar defines maysir as gambling. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid defines maysir as gambling and connects its name to the expression about staking or dividing a camel. IBNABIHATIM (عبد الله بن مسعود، ابن عباس، عطاء، طاووس، سعيد بن جبير، الحسن، ابن سيرين، قتادة، مقاتل، السدي، عطاء الخراساني): Abu Muhammad reports 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
