<<chunk 30, part 2 of 0..4>>
: Ibn Abbas describes pre-Islamic maysir as wagering one's family and property; whoever defeated his opponent took both. BURSEVI (author): Maisir includes every kind of gambling, chess, and even children's games with walnuts and dice. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir derives from taking money easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due; the gambler was called yasir because he won a share of the slaughtered camel. ALUSI-FULL (الواحدي): Al-Wāḥidī derives maysir from something becoming due, calling the gambler the one who owes the stake. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir includes all gambling and wagering: backgammon, chess, children’s nuts and dice, risky lots outside division, and every kind of stake; Ibn Sīrīn says anything involving risk is maysir. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir is a verbal noun on the pattern of mawʿid or marjiʿ, used for gambling; its derivation may refer to taking wealth easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due. ELMALILI (author): Pre-Islamic Arabs gambled using games learned from Arabs, Persians, and others, including backgammon and chess. ELMALILI (author): A lottery used ten named arrows to divide a slaughtered camel into twenty-eight shares, with seven arrows assigned increasing portions from one to seven. ELMALILI (author): Because the lottery was treated as charity and an honorable practice despite being gambling, maysir came to denote gambling generally. ELMALILI (author): Elmalılı cites a hadith classifying children's knucklebone and walnut games as maysir. ELMALILI (author): If even a lottery framed as charity is forbidden, ordinary forms of gambling are forbidden all the more. ELMALILI (author): Maysir is a verbal noun from yusr or yasar meaning gambling, associated with acquiring or transferring wealth easily and without effort. ELMALILI (author): Elmalılı renders al-khamr as wine and al-maysir as gambling. TABATABAI (أبو الحسن عليه السلام): Imam al-Rida identifies al-maysir as gambling. TABATABAI (author): Numerous reports support identifying al-maysir with gambling, a meaning the author regards as beyond doubt. TABATABAI (author): Maysir means gambling and yāsir means gambler; its root connotes ease because it acquires another’s property without the toil of earning. STUDYQURAN (author): Maysir literally names one form of gambling, while qimār is the broader term for gambling generally. STUDYQURAN (author): Commentators debate the legitimacy of various forms of play; Islamic law forbids wagering, while many frown on idle games such as chess and backgammon as spiritual distractions without outlawing them outright. STUDYQURAN (author): Chess and backgammon came to the West from the Islamic world and remain popular among Muslims, including many devout people."}, {"id": "2:219/q08/p2", "position": "Its original or strict sense is the Arab camel-arrow lottery.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj argues by analogy that anything producing wine’s effect should be called wine and share its prohibition; consensus forbids all gambling though the verse names the camel-lottery form. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Scholars agree all gambling is forbidden; the verse names maysir as an example, though strictly maysir applies to gambling over camels. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi reports disagreement over whether maysir names the camel-arrow game alone or all gambling. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maysir originally means the Arabs’ gambling with arrows. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Qurtubi extends the prohibition to all gambling by consensus, since maysir originally concerned wagering on camels; by the same analogy, other intoxicants take wine’s ruling."}, {"id": "2:219/q08/p3", "position": "Some games or permitted races and rights-allocation lots fall outside prohibited maysir.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi permits chess when there is no wager, obscene speech, or neglect of prayer; without a transfer of money it is neither gambling nor maysir. RAZI-FULL (أهل الاتفاق): The scholars agree that wagers in races involving hoofed animals or horses are not maysir; the detailed rules are treated in the jurisprudence chapter on racing and archery. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد ومحمد بن سيرين والحسن وابن المسيب وعطاء وقتادة ومعاوية بن صالح وطاوس وعلي بن أبي طالب وابن عباس): These authorities define maysir broadly as anything involving gambling, including dice, chess, and children’s games with walnuts or knucklebones, except permitted horse wagers and lotteries for allocating rights. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (علي، وابن عباس، وعطاء، وابن سيرين، والحسن، وابن المسيب، وقتادة، وطاووس، ومجاهد، ومعاوية بن صالح): These authorities classify every gambling game, including dice, chess, and children’s knucklebones or nuts, as maysir, except permitted horse wagers and lots for allocating rights. BIQAI-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi is quoted as defining maysir as any game requiring a person to pay or receive money; chess without a wager, abusive speech, or missed prayer is not maysir. BIQAI-FULL (القزاز): Al-Qazzaz calls the gamblers collectively yusr, with an individual yāsir; he also uses yusr for an arrow thrower and maysir for dice, but not chess because its meaning differs."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q09", "question": "Does gambling include exchanging an animal for meat, and what is the ruling?", "turns_on": "The transmitted ban on exchanging an animal for meat, its chain, and analogy determine the legal scope.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q09/p1", "position": "The scope across animal species and the strength of the relevant report are disputed.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (مالك وجمهور أصحابه): For animals and meat of the same species, Mālik and most companions classify the exchange as muzābana, uncertainty, and gambling: meat yield is unknown and meat cannot be exchanged unequally. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): Mālik treats all birds as one genus and all fish as one; one report from him singles out locusts as their own category. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عمر): Abū ʿUmar knows no established connected chain for the prohibition; its best chain is Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib's mursal report as Mālik gives it. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي): Although al-Shāfiʿī generally rejects mursal reports, he examined Saʿīd's and found most sound; he applies the prohibition generally across animal and meat kinds and will not qualify the text by analogy without a specific report or consensus. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي): For al-Shāfiʿī, animal includes all creatures living on land or in water regardless of species, just as food names every edible or drinkable thing. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي والليث بن سعد): Al-Shāfiʿī, his companions, and al-Layth ibn Saʿd prohibit exchanging meat for a live animal in all cases, whether species match or differ, relying on the hadith's general wording. STUDYQURAN (author): Islamic financial theory invalidates some transactions for excessive risk; theorists relate that risk to the prohibition of ribā, which some discuss as a severe form of risk. | mentions 2:275, 2:276, 2:277, 2:278, 2:279, 2:280"}, {"id": "2:219/q09/p2", "position": "Selling an animal for meat is forbidden because of gambling, uncertainty, or a transmitted prohibition.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Mālik transmits from Zayd ibn Aslam, from Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib, that the Prophet forbade selling an animal for meat. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī says he knows no Companion who disagreed with Abū Bakr's refusal of the exchange. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عمر): Abū ʿUmar acknowledges the Kūfans' many analogical arguments for permissibility, but says sound transmitted evidence overrides analogy."}, {"id": "2:219/q09/p3", "position": "The exchange may be permitted by analogy or where the report is unsound.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عمر): Abū ʿUmar notes a report from Ibn ʿAbbās permitting sale of a sheep for meat, but judges it weak. QURTUBI-FULL (سعيد بن المسيب): ʿAbd al-Razzāq transmits through al-Thawrī and Yaḥyā ibn Saʿīd that Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib disliked selling a live animal for a slaughtered one; Sufyān says his group sees no problem. QURTUBI-FULL (سفيان): Sufyān's own position is that exchanging a live animal for slaughtered meat is unobjectionable. QURTUBI-FULL (المزني): Al-Muzanī says analogy permits animal for meat if the hadith is not sound, but if sound, analogy falls and the report must be followed."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q10", "question": "How is the name ٱلْمَيْسِرِ derived?", "turns_on": "Which sense of y-s-r explains the name: easy gain, entitlement, or cutting and division.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q10/p1", "position": "It comes from dividing or slaughtering the camel and apportioning its meat.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Maysir means gambling; its name is linked to the expression aysiru, meaning to slaughter or divide an animal, as in a wager to put up set amounts. TAB-FULL (author): Gambling’s benefit was the share of camel meat won by the players, who wagered on a camel, slaughtered it when a player won, and divided it into ten lots according to the arrows. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid defines maysir as gambling and connects its name to the expression about staking or dividing a camel. THALABI (مقاتل): Mujahid says it was named maysir because gamblers said the camel's price had become theirs; wealthy Arabs bought a camel and divided it into shares. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Arabs slaughtered a camel, divided it into shares, and gambled over them using arrows. WAHIDI-BASIT (النضر): Al-Nadr says yāsir means butcher and yasarat al-nāqa means she divided the camel’s meat; al-Aʿsha uses yāsir for butcher. JISHUMI (author): Maysir means gambling; proposed derivations connect it with something won by the arrows, with dividing the camel’s meat into shares, or with ease in arranging the joint purchase, all carried out as a lottery. JISHUMI (أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim describes a camel divided by ten arrows: seven marked arrows carried known shares and three carried none; winners got the corresponding meat share and paid its price, whil
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
