<<chunk 31, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q11", "question": "How was the camel lottery played and who received its meat?", "turns_on": "Reports disagree on ten versus twenty-eight portions, what a blank arrow does, and whether winners keep or distribute meat.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q11/p1", "position": "Other details concern the arrows, drawing procedure, participants, or uses of the meat.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): In the gambling game, a group bought a camel by shares and drew lots; the person whose lot came out paid the whole price but received no meat, which the others divided. MUQATIL (author): Maysir was named from their phrase yassirū lanā thamana al-jazūr, meaning make the camel's price easy for us. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Aʿshā ibn Thaʿlaba’s camel-wager poem, beginning “wa-jazūru aysārin,” illustrates the camel meat won in maysir. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid identifies the benefits of maysir as the portions of the camel won in gambling. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid defines maysir as gambling and connects its name to the expression about staking or dividing a camel. IBNABIHATIM (النبي، أبو موسى الأشعري): The Prophet says to avoid marked dice used for casting lots, since they are maysir. IBNABIHATIM (الأعرج): Al-Araj defines maysir as casting arrows for stakes of property and fruit. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid explains the benefits as the price of wine and the camel meat people obtained through gambling. IBNABIHATIM (شبل، ابن جريج): Shibl and Ibn Jurayj support the report that the benefits included what people obtained from the camel. IBNABIHATIM (طاوس عن مجاهد): A report through Mujahid from Tawus defines al-afw as the easy or readily available portion of everything. IBNABIHATIM (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi explains al-afw as the good portion of one's wealth, its best and finest part. THALABI (علي): Ali reports that intoxicated Hamza slaughtered and ate Ali's camels, which Ali planned to sell to fund his marriage to Fatima; Hamza insulted Ali's lineage, and the Prophet compensated him. THALABI (سفيان الثوري وأبو حنيفة وأبو يوسف وأكثر أهل الرأي): This legal school narrowly defines khamr as naturally fermented grape or date juice, without fire; other drinks are not khamr by name. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): Ibn Sirin reports Umar told an official to cook the drink until two-thirds evaporated, leaving one share for people and removing the devil's two shares. THALABI (أبو سعيد): Abu Said defines tala as a drink cooked until two-thirds evaporate; the name reflects its dark thickness like camel ointment. THALABI (author): Maysir is linked to yasara, meaning something became due; a yāsir is the lot-caster. Al-Nabigha and another poet use yāsir for a gambler. THALABI (مقاتل): Mujahid says it was named maysir because gamblers said the camel's price had become theirs; wealthy Arabs bought a camel and divided it into shares. THALABI (الأصمعي): Al-Asmai says there were twenty shares, with ten additional lots added to them. THALABI (author): Seven lots carried shares: al-fadhdh one, al-taw'am two, al-raft three, al-jals four, al-nafis five, al-masil six, and al-mughli seven; three others carried none. THALABI (author): The camel game was the Arabs' original form of gambling, and God's prohibition here covers every kind of gambling. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The player with arrows was called a yāsir; the term was then applied to the gambler. MAWARDI-FULL (الشاعر): An unnamed poet likens himself to a cheated yāsir turning the arrows, illustrating the gambling sense. MAWARDI-FULL (السدي): In al-Suddi's report, a drunken dispute at a meal hosted by Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas led an Anṣari to strike Sa'd's nose with a camel jawbone; the prohibition in 5:90 was then revealed. | mentions 5:90 WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj argues by analogy that anything producing wine’s effect should be called wine and share its prohibition; consensus forbids all gambling though the verse names the camel-lottery form. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Maysir is a mafʿil from yasara, to become due; yāsir is one whose lot or wager becomes due, then the terms meant gambling and gambler. WAHIDI-BASIT (طرفة): Ṭarafa’s verse uses aysār as the plural of yusr for participants in the lot-based camel gamble. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأعرابي): Ibn al-Aʿrabi explains yasara al-yāsir as bringing one’s arrow to gamble. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Another derivation links maysir to division and sharing; yasaru means to divide, illustrated by a poem about dividing the speaker like a camel’s limbs. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Arabs slaughtered a camel, divided it into shares, and gambled over them using arrows. WAHIDI-BASIT (النضر): Al-Nadr says yāsir means butcher and yasarat al-nāqa means she divided the camel’s meat; al-Aʿsha uses yāsir for butcher. WAHIDI-BASIT (مقاتل): A further derivation takes maysir from ease because people shared a camel to make its cost easier; Muqatil says they asked to split its price. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Al-ʿafw means increase; the verse until they grew and a poem about fat camels illustrate abundance. | mentions 7:95 JISHUMI (author): Maysir means gambling; proposed derivations connect it with something won by the arrows, with dividing the camel’s meat into shares, or with ease in arranging the joint purchase, all carried out as a lottery. KASHSHAF-FULL (عمر): After Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas was struck with a camel jawbone during a drunken gathering, he complained to the Prophet and Umar prayed for a clear ruling on wine. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): In a cited poem, al-manīḥ is a borrowed, smooth arrow that had won often; this favorable loan-arrow differs from the blank manīḥ, which is praised for its turning back. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جرير): Jarīr’s line uses al-manīḥ for the blank arrow, described as one that turns back, rather than the lucky borrowed arrow. IBNATIYYA-FULL (لبيد): Labīd’s line says the lottery need not produce shameful acts, another poetic illustration of the practice’s benefits before the Qurʾānic judgment of its sin. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Maysir derives from y-s-r in the sense of slaughtering; yāsir means the slaughterer, and the camel subject to the draw was called maysir, then the arrows by association. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Two cited poetic lines use y-s-r language for the slaughter-and-lottery practice, supporting the derivation from slaughter. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid’s intended sense was slaughter; a yāsir is someone who participates in drawing lots, plural aysār (also described as yusr). IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The lottery used seven arrows with assigned shares and three blanks without shares: al-fadhdh, al-tawʾam, al-raqīb, al-ḥils, al-nāfis, al-musbil, al-muʿallā; al-manīḥ, al-safīḥ, and al-waghd were blanks. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The three blank arrows were added to multiply and mix the lots so the person drawing them could not favor anyone. TABRISI (author): A further derivation connects maysir to ease, since people joined to make sharing the camel easier, though they did so by gambling. TABRISI (author): Maysir is gambling, named from yusr because the winner's share becomes due; the gambler is called yāsir because lots determine what is owed. TABRISI (author): Another derivation links maysir to division: whatever is divided is yassartahu; yāsir and maysir can also name the camel being divided. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj says the named wine is the agreed-upon kind, and by analogy every drink that acts like it shares its prohibition. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Scholars agree all gambling is forbidden; the verse names maysir as an example, though strictly maysir applies to gambling over camels. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba derives the word from yāsara, drawing lots with arrows; the person who draws is called yāsir, yāsirūn, yusr, or aysār. RAZI-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abu Hanifa defines khamr narrowly as strong grape juice that has thrown up foam. RAZI-FULL (الخطابي): Al-Khattabi says the five sources are named because they were familiar then, not exclusive; maize, sult, and tree extracts share their rule, as unlisted usury goods share the rule of the six named goods. RAZI-FULL (author): Because Umar and Muadh sought a ruling on wine as a destroyer of reason and wealth, Razi argues that anything with the same effect must be wine or share its ruling. RAZI-FULL (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba derives maysir from apportioning: the camel is named for being divided, the butcher for portioning it, and gamblers are called yasirun because they divide its meat. RAZI-FULL (الواحدي): Al-Wahidi derives maysir from yassara li, meaning that something became due; the lot-winner is the one made entitled by the arrows. RAZI-FULL (author): Reason is humanity's noblest faculty and restrains base impulses like a camel's tether; wine removes that restraint, so drinking is among the vilest acts. RAZI-FULL (شاعر لم يسمه المصدر): An unnamed poet lists waghad, safih, and manih as arrows with no winnings, illustrating the arrow names in the gambling practice. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi reports disagreement over whether maysir names the camel-arrow game alone or all gambling. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maysir derives from yusr: it is something that becomes due to its owner; yāsir is the player with the arrows. QURTUBI-FULL (الشاعر): The cited line “fa-aʿinhum wa-aysir…” uses a form from y-s-r for playing the arrows or taking part in maysir. QURTUBI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azhari says maysir can name the camel gambled over because it is divided into shares; anything divided is described with the same root. QURTUBI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azhari says yāsir originally means the butcher who portions the camel; by extension it names the arrow players and gamblers who cause the slaughter. QURTUBI-FULL (الصحاح): Al-Sihah records that “the people yasara the camel” means they slaughtered it and divided its portions. QURTUBI-FULL (author): He then cites the command to avoid wine, gambling, idols, and divining arrows as satanic impurity. | mentions 5:90 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maysir originally means t
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
