<<chunk 31, part 2 of 0..5>>
ines ḥarḍa as the game steward, al-ḥils as the fourth arrow, al-nafis as fifth, and al-musbil as sixth or fifth. BIQAI-FULL (مجمع البحرين): Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn gives al-muṣaffah as another name for al-musbil. BIQAI-FULL (القاموس): Al-Qamus calls al-muʿalla the seventh arrow and defines al-maniḥ and al-safih as blanks; al-waghd is both a blank arrow and a fool, weakling, or contemptible person. BIQAI-FULL (القائلون بهذا القول): A reported account says that if each arrow received exactly its allotted share, no one would bear a loss or win, so the game would not count as gambling. BIQAI-FULL (القزاز): Al-Qazzāz says al-tawʾam is the second gambling arrow, named for its two stakes and two camel shares; the seven winning arrows carry stakes and shares from one through seven, while three arrows carry no stake. BIQAI-FULL (author): The three arrows without stakes are called aghfāl, like livestock without a brand. BIQAI-FULL (author): A blindfolded handler drew the arrows from a bag while an appointed trustee shook them two or three times; blank arrows were returned to the bag. BIQAI-FULL (author): In Imruʾ al-Qays's poem, the beloved strikes the heart with al-muʿallā and al-raqīb and wins the whole heart, as a gambler can win all the camel's shares with two arrows. BIQAI-FULL (author): An earlier gloss of Kathīr's verse says travel had emaciated the camel until it had no meat, as if two winning arrows had taken all its shares. BIQAI-FULL (author): He prefers a marginal gloss: the camel's endurance makes it outpace other camels like a gambler whose arrow wins twice; this better fits the line's saying the camel itself won with two arrows. BIQAI-FULL (كثير): Kathīr's verse portrays a camel passing through midday heat and night travel as though it had won with two of the arrow-drawer's arrows. BIQAI-FULL (author): Unequal results can also arise when arrows leave the bag aligned and several fall to one player; if there are fewer players than arrows, one person may win most of the camel. BIQAI-FULL (author): The game remains a gamble even when the number of arrows matches the players: a player may draw none and owe payment, while no one can be sure of winning. BIQAI-FULL (author): If early winners exhaust the camel, the remaining players pay its cost; if a winner's stake exceeds the remaining shares, he takes the remainder and the others compensate the excess proportionally. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says al-maysir means gambling and derives its name from gamblers' phrase aysara jazuran, meaning to stake a camel. SUYUTI-LUBAB (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked what portion of their wealth they should give; the answer was to spend the surplus. BURSEVI (المفسرون): At ʿItbān ibn Mālik's feast, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ recited a poem insulting the Anṣār and praising his clan; a guest struck and wounded Saʿd with a camel's jawbone, after which Saʿd complained to the Messenger. ALUSI-FULL (الإمام أبي حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa defines wine narrowly as grape juice that boils, ferments, and casts up foam; the term is explained as covering the mind, like a woman’s veil covers her face. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir derives from taking money easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due; the gambler was called yasir because he won a share of the slaughtered camel. ALUSI-FULL (الأزهري): Al-Azharī gives another description of the arrow names and omits al-waghd; al-Alusi relies on the account preferred by al-Zamakhsharī and many others. ALUSI-FULL (بعضهم): An unnamed poet composed a mnemonic listing the ten gambling arrows and their shares, including the three blank arrows. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir includes all gambling and wagering: backgammon, chess, children’s nuts and dice, risky lots outside division, and every kind of stake; Ibn Sīrīn says anything involving risk is maysir. ALUSI-FULL (author): Maysir is a verbal noun on the pattern of mawʿid or marjiʿ, used for gambling; its derivation may refer to taking wealth easily, losing wealth, dividing shares, or a stake becoming due. ELMALILI (author): For the legal question of drinking, all intoxicants count as hamr in the broad sense; chemically, fermentation gives intoxicants a shared wine-like nature, reflected in the word alcohol. TABATABAI (author): The ten arrows were al-fadhdh, al-tawʾam, al-raqīb, al-ḥils, al-nāfis, al-musbِل, al-muʿallā, al-manīḥ, al-sanīḥ, and al-raghd; the first seven drew assigned shares and the last three drew none. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (bazı fıkıhçılar): Some jurists, following the narrow definition of khamr, held that every amount of grape wine is forbidden but other intoxicants are forbidden only in an intoxicating quantity. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Broadening aid beyond gambling proceeds and zakat to surplus goods, food, and clothing promotes social justice and makes unmet basic needs rare."}, {"id": "2:219/q11/p2", "position": "Winners gave their portions to the poor and took pride in doing so.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The companions ask what portion of their wealth to give as charity; God answers that they should give al-ʿafw. THALABI (سعد بن أبي وقاص): Atban's feast included wine and drunken boasting; Saʿd recited a poem insulting the Ansar, and an Ansari wounded him with a camel jawbone. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): At ʿItbān ibn Mālik’s feast, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ and others drank after eating camel’s head; Saʿd boasted and recited poetry insulting the Anṣār, and a man struck and split his head with a camel jawbone. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): On the alternative account, the meat went to the poor and participants did not eat it; they boasted of the practice and derided one who abstained as al-barim. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Winners gave their portions to the poor rather than eating them, boasted of generosity, and called anyone who refused to gamble al-baram. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الأعشى): Al-Aʿshā’s verse praises the lottery’s provision of food to guests and the poor in winter, illustrating its social benefit. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A winning arrow took its allotted shares for the poor; sometimes participants gambled for themselves, and those who lost paid the price. The practice sustained the neighborhood’s poor. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): In winter hardship, wealthy men slaughtered a camel and divided it into shares by drawing arrows; winners gave shares to the needy, the benefit named in the verse, and people praised participation and condemned refusal. RAZI-FULL (سعد بن أبي وقاص وعمر): After intoxicated Ansar, including Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas, boasted and exchanged insulting verse, an Ansari split Saʿd's head with a camel jaw; Umar prayed for decisive clarification, and the final prohibition followed, to which he assented. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 RAZI-FULL (author): Gambling could transfer meat to needy people; al-Waqidi says a player might win a hundred camels in one gathering and distribute the proceeds, earning praise. RAZI-FULL (author): The players gave the meat to the poor rather than eating it themselves, took pride in doing so, and disparaged nonparticipants as baram. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Another view says gambling helped the poor because winners did not eat their shares but distributed the camel's meat to people in need. QURTUBI-FULL (author): After the camel was split into ten parts, each winner took the number of portions his arrow entitled him to and gave them to the poor. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Aʿshā praises those who feed guests in winter and put food at the disposal of the gambler; another poem says loaned arrows return with food for the needy. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The account next describes Utban inviting Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas and others; drunken boasting led Saʿd to insult the Anṣār, and an Anṣārī wounded him with a camel jaw. NASAFI-FULL (author): Winners gave shares to the poor, did not eat them, boasted of generosity, and disparaged those who declined to gamble. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A winner shared his portion with the poor, ate none of it, and took pride in generosity; those who abstained were called baram and disparaged, though gamblers sometimes ate for themselves. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another claimed benefit is aid to the needy: winners of the camel-meat game distributed their share to the poor. BIQAI-FULL (أهل المعرفة): Some people of insight said the benefit of gambling was that, during winter and famine, Arabs wagered camels and gave the meat to the poor, improving their circumstances. BIQAI-FULL (الكشاف): Al-Kashshāf says the participants gave their winnings to the poor and kept none for themselves; al-Biqāʿī notes this had also been transmitted from the author of al-Zīna. DURR-FULL (كدير الضبي): A Bedouin asks the Prophet for a deed to Paradise and away from Hell: uphold justice and give surplus; when too difficult, feed people and spread peace, or water a needy household from one's camel and waterskin. BURSEVI (author): Gambling could bring unearned money and meat for the poor, since winners distributed the camel's meat to people in need. ELMALILI (author): Because the lottery was treated as charity and an honorable practice despite being gambling, maysir came to denote gambling generally. ELMALILI (author): If even a lottery framed as charity is forbidden, ordinary forms of gambling are forbidden all the more."}, {"id": "2:219/q11/p3", "position": "The camel was divided into twenty-eight shares corresponding to the seven winning arrows.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (أبو عمرو): Abu ʿAmr says they divided the camel into ten portions; another report gives twenty-eight portions. Ten lots were cast and called azlam. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The game used ten marked arrows, with seven assigned shares and three blanks; a slaughtered camel was divided into ten portions or, in another account, twenty-eight, then a just person drew arrows to assign shares and losers paid the full cost. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Arabs used this practice in winter scarcity and severe cold: participant
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
