<<chunk 31, part 3 of 0..5>>
s guaranteed the camel’s price, slaughtered it, and divided it into ten portions; al-Aṣmaʿī’s claim of twenty-eight portions is mistaken. RAZI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): Al-Kashshaf describes ten named arrows used to divide a slaughtered camel into ten shares (or twenty-eight, excluding three blank arrows); each arrow had a fixed allotment. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The lottery used eleven arrows; seven marked arrows had graded shares: al-fidh, al-tawʾam, al-raqīb, al-ḥalis, al-nafis or al-nafiz, al-misbal, and al-muʿallā. Al-Aṣmaʿī says their shares totaled twenty-eight portions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Arabs played in winter hardship to provide for the poor: the players bought and slaughtered a camel, dividing it into ten shares according to Abu Amr or twenty-eight according to al-Asma'i. SAMIN-DURR (الأصمعي): Al-Aṣmaʿī says the camel was divided by the count of marked lines, producing twenty-eight portions. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls al-Aṣmaʿī's division mistaken. SAMIN-DURR (author): The author calls that correction surprising: Arabs may have divided the camel by ten lots on one occasion and by twenty-eight marked shares on another. BIQAI-FULL (أبو عمرو والأصمعي): Abu Amr says the camel was divided into ten portions, while al-Asmaʿi says there were twenty-eight. BIQAI-FULL (القاموس): Al-Qamus says gamblers bought a camel on credit, slaughtered it, and divided it into 28 shares or ten portions; the winning arrows took shares while blank arrows incurred the cost. BIQAI-FULL (الأصمعي): Al-Asmaʿi instead assigns 28 shares to the arrows, beginning with one for al-fadh and two for al-taw'am; the author reports that most scholars disagreed and considered him mistaken. BIQAI-FULL (author): He corrects his earlier dismissal of the twenty-eight-share account: unequal stakes still produce unequal awards, since al-muʿallā yields seven of twenty-eight shares, more than arrows with six or fewer stakes. BIQAI-FULL (الأصمعي): Al-Aṣmaʿī is reported by the author of al-Zīna and others as supporting the twenty-eight-share division of the camel. BIQAI-FULL (القائلون بهذا القول): One view divides the camel into twenty-eight portions, matching the total arrow stakes from one through seven. ALUSI-FULL (author): The traditional game used ten arrows, three blank; the other seven awarded one through seven shares of a camel divided into twenty-eight parts, while a blank-draw loser paid the entire cost. ELMALILI (author): A lottery used ten named arrows to divide a slaughtered camel into twenty-eight shares, with seven arrows assigned increasing portions from one to seven. TABATABAI (author): A common Arabian form of gambling used arrows or lots to divide a slaughtered camel into twenty-eight shares among ten men; seven winning arrows awarded one to seven shares, while three losing arrows had no share and their holders paid the camel’s cost. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Maysir was played with a camel bought on credit, divided into 28 portions; ten arrows, seven marked with shares and three blank, were drawn, with winners receiving meat shares and losers paying the cost. Against — QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya corrects al-Aṣmaʿī: the camel was divided into ten portions before the draw, not twenty-eight according to the arrow shares. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya says al-Asma'i was mistaken to divide the camel into twenty-eight portions. Against — BIQAI-FULL (author): He rejects the twenty-eight-part view here: if everyone simply took the shares attached to his arrow until all arrows were drawn, there would be no meaningful win, loss, or gambling; he initially judges the other account sounder."}, {"id": "2:219/q11/p4", "position": "A blank arrow received no meat and its holder paid the camel’s price or a share of its cost.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): Lots were shaken in a bag by a trusted drawer; each named player won the share assigned to the drawn lot, while a blank lot triggered a dispute over who paid for the camel. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The lots were drawn from a bag by a trusted selector; under one account a blank drew no share but made its holder pay for the whole camel, while another account says a blank was simply void. RAZI-FULL (author): The arrows were shaken in a bag by a trusted person, then drawn for each player; winners took their marked meat shares, while blank-arrow players received nothing and paid for the whole camel. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maysir offered a share without work: the group bought a camel, winners received meat without paying, while the final loser paid the full price and got no meat. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Sometimes people gambled for themselves, so the person whose arrow did not win paid the camel's entire price; the practice fed poor people of the clan, as al-Aʿshā's verse says. NASAFI-FULL (author): An impartial arbiter drew arrows from a bag; winners took their marked share, while blank-drawers got nothing and paid the camel’s full cost. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A winning arrow awarded its marked share; a blank won nothing and its holder had to cover the full cost of the camel. SAMIN-DURR (author): A marked lot won its assigned share; a blank meant the person paid toward the camel. This was done in winter scarcity, with the meat given to the poor, not eaten by participants; they took pride in it and called nonparticipants البرم. BIQAI-FULL (بعضهم): One reported view says a person drawing a blank arrow neither wins nor pays; the drawing is repeated, and that person's turn is treated as void. BIQAI-FULL (بعضهم): A competing view says the holders of the three blank arrows pay the entire camel's price, while the seven winning holders take their allotted shares. ELMALILI (author): Three arrows were blank; participants drew on one another's behalf, losers paid for the camel, and winners donated their portions to the poor. STUDYQURAN (author): In maysir, players draw arrows to divide meat; the loser pays without receiving meat and is mocked, while winners give their shares to the poor as generosity."}, {"id": "2:219/q11/p5", "position": "A camel was divided into ten portions and assigned through marked and blank arrows.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Gambling’s benefit was the share of camel meat won by the players, who wagered on a camel, slaughtered it when a player won, and divided it into ten lots according to the arrows. THALABI (أبو عمرو): Abu Amr counts ten shares in the camel-gambling game. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس، مجاهد، السدي): Another account is obtaining a share of the camel gambled over and divided into ten portions among the arrow winners; Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, and al-Suddi are cited for this view. JISHUMI (أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim describes a camel divided by ten arrows: seven marked arrows carried known shares and three carried none; winners got the corresponding meat share and paid its price, while those with blank arrows got no meat and paid nothing. Outsiders were called burma, while the players were called aysar. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The original Arab form of maysir involved wealthy men buying and slaughtering a camel and dividing its meat by lots drawn for ten shares: seven marked lots awarded one through seven portions and three blank lots. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya corrects al-Aṣmaʿī: the camel was divided into ten portions before the draw, not twenty-eight according to the arrow shares. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya says al-Asma'i was mistaken to divide the camel into twenty-eight portions. SAMIN-DURR (author): Most divided the camel into ten portions, one per lot. BIQAI-FULL (صاحب الزينة): The Zina account says the camel was divided into ten shares; al-raqib could draw repeatedly, taking three shares each time, and when the camel was exhausted the remaining players paid according to their shares. BIQAI-FULL (author): The arrows are called aʿshār because the camel was divided into ten portions. BIQAI-FULL (author): A camel was slaughtered and apportioned into ten shares: the haunches, rump, withers, chest, back, shoulders, and thighs were divided, with neck and loose skin shared evenly. BIQAI-FULL (author): Imruʾ al-Qays compares a beloved's eyes to two arrows striking the ten shares of a slain heart: the two winning arrows capture the whole heart. Against — SAMIN-DURR (author): The author calls that correction surprising: Arabs may have divided the camel by ten lots on one occasion and by twenty-eight marked shares on another. Against — BIQAI-FULL (author): He corrects his earlier dismissal of the twenty-eight-share account: unequal stakes still produce unequal awards, since al-muʿallā yields seven of twenty-eight shares, more than arrows with six or fewer stakes."}, {"id": "2:219/q11/p6", "position": "A blank arrow was void and the draw was repeated without payment.", "reasons": "THALABI (بعضهم): Some said a player drawn with a blank lot neither took a share nor paid; that lot was void and the draw repeated. BIQAI-FULL (author): A blank arrow is redrawn; a winner takes the share attached to his arrow and withdraws without loss, and the drawing continues until the shares run out."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q12", "question": "Why are wine and gambling mentioned together?", "turns_on": "Customary association and the verse’s surrounding topics explain the pairing in different ways.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q12/p1", "position": "The two were associated in custom and both waste wealth, impair judgment, or lead to one another.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (أبو الأسود الدؤلي): After someone claimed a differently named intoxicant was lawful, Abū al-Aswad recognized it as wine’s kin; his poem says the two are siblings nurtured by the same mother. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet said God was moving toward prohibiting wine; some abandoned it, while others continued for its benefits and tried to avoid its harms. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Their sin includes quarrels, insults, obscene and false speech, loss of reason, and missing prayer; g
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
