<<chunk 31, part 4 of 0..5>>
ambling breeds hostility when one takes another’s money without compensation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Maysir derives from y-s-r in the sense of slaughtering; yāsir means the slaughterer, and the camel subject to the draw was called maysir, then the arrows by association. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The different harms mentioned for wine and gambling may all be intended together. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأعشى): Al-A'sha's verse praises feeding a winter guest and providing food for the gambler, evidence of the game's association with generosity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مالك): Mālik distinguishes amusement maysir, such as dice and chess, from gambling maysir, in which people wager against one another. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Benefits include money from trading in wine, gambling, and other gains; even prohibited things have some benefit, especially when people naturally desire them or grow accustomed to them. SAMIN-DURR (author): One derivation takes maysir from ease, because winnings are easy to obtain; another derives it from wealth, since gambling strips a person of wealth. BIQAI-FULL (author): The pronoun refers to using or consuming both wine and gambling. BIQAI-FULL (author): He rejects the twenty-eight-part view here: if everyone simply took the shares attached to his arrow until all arrows were drawn, there would be no meaningful win, loss, or gambling; he initially judges the other account sounder. BURSEVI (author): Their grave sin is that wine destroys reason, the pivot of religion and worldly life, and both wine and gambling ruin wealth. ELMALILI (Hazret-i Ali): Ali rejected a wager in which one person promised eggs to another who could eat a specified quantity, ruling that it was gambling. ELMALILI (author): Asking about wine and gambling together points to their customary association. ELMALILI (author): Both waste wealth and ruin people, and each commonly leads to the other; wine removes reason, enabling innumerable crimes and evils linked to gambling. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Wine can cause addiction, impaired judgment, conflict and mockery, neglect of God and useful activity, waste, and harm to health and future generations."}, {"id": "2:219/q12/p2", "position": "Their pairing follows the adjacent discussion of striving, spending, or the later parallel in al-Māʾida.", "reasons": "BIQAI-FULL (author): Wine and gambling are paired because both undermine striving and other goods by transferring wealth without the owner's willing consent. BIQAI-FULL (author): The author says wine and gambling are paired here as they are in the Maidah passage. | mentions 5:90"}]}
{"id": "2:219/q13", "question": "What does فِيهِمَآ grammatically refer to and imply?", "turns_on": "Whether the grammar emphasizes the acts of using them or the surface wording and dual pronoun.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q13/p1", "position": "Sin is located in using wine and gambling, with an understood act or figurative containment.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Although sin is ascribed to wine and gambling themselves, it means drinking wine and gambling, since sin cannot literally be the substances. JISHUMI (author): The direct reading is stronger: the sin is attached to wine and gambling, not their consequences, which may not occur even though the sin remains. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): “In them is sin” may mean sin in using wine and gambling after the prohibition, or the evil qualities inherent in them. BIQAI-FULL (author): The pronoun refers to using or consuming both wine and gambling. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن العربي): Ibn al-Arabi defines sin as blame attached to an act, effectively the opposite of reward."}, {"id": "2:219/q13/p2", "position": "The prepositional phrase is the fronted predicate and ithm the delayed subject.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مكي): Makkī treats الآيات as indefinite, making the two prepositional phrases descriptions of signs existing in both abodes; Abū Ḥayyān calls this a semantic paraphrase. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects saying the phrase syntactically attaches to الآيات: a noun cannot govern the prepositional phrase; it must modify the noun through an implicit participle or state. SAMIN-DURR (author): فيهما is the fronted predicate and إثم the delayed subject. Fronting is optional because indefiniteness is also licensed by description or coordination; a noun meaning their use is omitted because sin is not inherent in the substances. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The figurative container preposition fi emphasizes how closely sin and benefit attach to wine and gambling, in their customary use."}, {"id": "2:219/q13/p3", "position": "The dual pronoun has variant vowel readings, both grammatical.", "reasons": "QIRAAT-ER (author): The canonical vowel variant changes the hāʾ of fīhimā from kasra to ḍamma, with both dual pronoun forms grammatically valid."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q14", "question": "What does إِثْمٌۭ mean here?", "turns_on": "Whether ithm is sin and culpability, harm, wrongfully taken property, or delay from good.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q14/p1", "position": "Ithm is sin, blameworthy disobedience, or what conduces to sin and punishment.", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA (author): Taʾaththama and taḥawwaba mean avoiding sin although their forms might suggest committing it, like tafawwaqa and tajarraʿa. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Labīd’s h-j-d forms contrast sleeping with staying awake; the Qurʾān uses tahajjud for night prayer, illustrating the specialized sense. | mentions 17:79 JISHUMI (author): Although sin is ascribed to wine and gambling themselves, it means drinking wine and gambling, since sin cannot literally be the substances. TABRISI (author): Wine is called ithm in Arabic, as the cited poem shows; the verse’s description of it as a great sin also supports prohibition. TABRISI (أهل الكوفة غير عاصم): Kufan readers other than ʿĀṣim read إثم كثير with thāʾ, while the other readers use bāʾ and read إثم كبير. RAZI-FULL (author): Whether ithm means punishment or the sins that deserve punishment, it can only describe what is forbidden; calling the sin greater than the benefit likewise entails prohibition. RAZI-FULL (النبي): The Prophet calls the best charity what leaves its giver self-sufficient, and says a person with only enough for bare needs is not blameworthy. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read إثم كثير (“many sins”); the majority read كبير (“great sin”). كثرة can refer to many offenders, cumulative punishment, many sinful acts, or the many parties involved in wine. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān praises the passage's eloquence, its joined clauses and elegant structure, and its movement from warning about disobedience at the opening to glad tidings for believers at the end. SAMIN-DURR (author): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read كثير; the others read كبير. The majority form suits sin described as grave, drinking and gambling as major sins, and the seven readers' ب in وإثمهما أكبر. | mentions 4:2, 42:37 NASHR (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisai read إثم كثير with thāʾ; the other readers read إثم كبير with bāʾ. ITQAN (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy ibn Kaʿb says plural الرياح denotes mercy throughout the Quran, while singular الريح denotes punishment. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ithm is disobedience through a corrupt act God does not approve; in legal usage it is a blameworthy act opposed to devotional obedience. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Calling the outcome ithm signals that users incur punishment in this world and the next. TABATABAI (author): First, sin does not simply mean harm; that definition fails for Qur’anic uses of ithm concerning associating partners, a sinful heart, liability for another’s sin, and acquired sins. | mentions 4:48, 2:283, 5:29, 24:11, 4:111 TABATABAI (author): Ithm is close to sin and describes a condition in an act or mind that slows a person from attaining good; wine and gambling have this quality. ASAD-NOTES (Razi): Razi and other classical commentators point out that ithm is used as the antithesis of manafiʿ, “benefits.”"}, {"id": "2:219/q14/p2", "position": "Ithm denotes harm or evil in contrast with benefit.", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden. TABATABAI (بعض المفسرين): Some exegetes argue that this verse is not explicit in prohibition: sin means harm, and an item with both harm and benefit is not thereby forbidden; they say Companions differed, some abstaining and others continuing while avoiding harm, until al-Māʾida’s explicit ban. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 TABATABAI (author): Khamr linguistically means any liquid made to intoxicate; its root sense is covering, since it veils the mind and its ability to distinguish good from evil. ASAD-NOTES (author): Ithm literally means sin or anything conducive to sinning; because it is contrasted with benefits, Asad considers “evil” a suitable rendering. Against — TABATABAI (author): First, sin does not simply mean harm; that definition fails for Qur’anic uses of ithm concerning associating partners, a sinful heart, liability for another’s sin, and acquired sins. | mentions 4:48, 2:283, 5:29, 24:11, 4:111 Against — TABATABAI (author): The verse does not explain the ruling merely by harm; even on that assumption, it explicitly says the sin outweighs the benefit, so appeal to independent Companion reasoning contradicts the text."}, {"id": "2:219/q14/p3", "position": "Its root suggests delay from good.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): فيهما is the fronted predicate and إثم the delayed subject. Fronting is optional because indefiniteness is also licensed by description or coordination; a noun meaning their use is omitted because sin is not inherent in the substances. IBNASHUR-FULL (الراغب): Al-Raghib suggests the derivation of ithm carries the sense of delay from good."}, {"id": "2:219/q14/p4", "position": "Ithm can denote property appropriated wrong
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
