<<chunk 32, part 3 of 0..5>>
azilites permit this drink because it is pleasant and not wine; the author responds that it is intoxicating and attracts sinners, so it should be prohibited to prevent corruption. ALUSI-FULL (author): The disagreement is substantial: permitting grape wine is disbelief by consensus, while permitting other intoxicants is not, since their designation as wine is disputed and their prohibition is inferential. ALUSI-FULL (author): The question concerns engaging in wine and gambling, as the answer’s “in them” makes clear; their sin comes from leading to neglected duties and committed prohibitions. ALUSI-FULL (إبن أبي الدنيا): Ibn Abī al-Dunyā recounts a drunk man urinating into his hand and washing his face with it as if performing ablution. ALUSI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله تعالى عليه وسلم): The Prophet said to avoid wine because it is the mother of all evils; al-Alusi adds that no prophets are reliably reported to have drunk it at any time. IBNASHUR-FULL (عمارة بن الوليد بن المغيرة المخزومي): Ibn Ashur introduces Amara ibn al-Walid's poem as evidence of money spent on wine. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Wine and gambling cause sin through drunken excess and disputes over gambling wins and losses. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The figurative container preposition fi emphasizes how closely sin and benefit attach to wine and gambling, in their customary use. TABATABAI (author): Al-Baqara 2:219 came after 4:43 and establishes prohibition by decisively calling wine a great sin, against the background of the earlier Meccan prohibition of sin. | mentions 4:43, 7:33 TABATABAI (author): The author points to shirk as another sin called great, using the Qur’an’s description in 4:48 when arguing that wine’s sin is especially grave. | mentions 4:48 TABATABAI (author): Even if 2:219 alone were insufficient to establish prohibition, its explicit naming of sin follows 7:33’s earlier general prohibition; wine is a complete instance of great sin. | mentions 7:33, 4:48 TABATABAI (author): After al-Baqara, al-Māʾida 5:90–91 calls wine and gambling satanic pollution and commands avoidance; its closing question shows Muslims had not fully ceased drinking before then. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 TABATABAI (علي بن يقطين): Ali ibn Yaqtin recounts the Mahdi questioning Abu al-Hasan about wine's Qur'anic prohibition; the Imam identifies Qur'anic sin with wine and cites 2:219, and the Mahdi acknowledges the Ahl al-Bayt's learning. | mentions 7:33, 2:219 TABATABAI (أحدهما عليهما السلام): One of the two Imams describes sin as a house with a door and lock, and wine as its key. TABATABAI (النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): The Prophet calls wine the head of every sin. TABATABAI (أبو جعفر عليه السلام): Imam al-Baqir says wine drinkers will be given a hellish drink made from the discharge of prostitutes, which he describes as pus and thick mixed blood. TABATABAI (أبو جعفر عليه السلام): When Quraysh ask which sin is greatest, Imam al-Baqir answers that drinking wine is the greatest. TABATABAI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم): The Prophet says God will not look on Judgment Day at four people: a disobedient child, a benefactor who reminds recipients of the gift, a denier of predestination, and a habitual wine drinker. TABATABAI (author): The threats in the wine reports may be supported by the Qur'anic description of the sinner's food and boiling punishment. | mentions 44:43-49 TABATABAI (author): Wine causes grave medical harms to the stomach, intestines, liver, lungs, nerves, arteries, heart, and senses, as physicians’ writings and statistics document. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Medina mainly used date-based wine, imported grape wine from Yemen, Taif, and Syria, and also consumed intoxicating raisin/date infusions and drinks made from honey, corn, or barley; intoxicating varieties were called khamr. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Pre-Islamic Arabs prized wine’s intoxication and pleasure and gambling’s entertainment, excitement, hospitality, and aid to the poor, while overlooking the harms. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The verse stresses that wine and gambling do more harm than good; some people therefore gave up wine even before the final prohibition. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Wine can cause addiction, impaired judgment, conflict and mockery, neglect of God and useful activity, waste, and harm to health and future generations."}, {"id": "2:219/q15/p3", "position": "Drunkenness leads to enmity, violence, false or obscene speech, and other offenses.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The harms of drinking wine and gambling exceed their gains: drunkenness led people to attack and fight, while gambling brought strife that led them into sin. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Their sin includes the quarrels, insults, obscene speech, falsehood, and other evils they cause. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The grave sin in wine and gambling includes quarrelling, mutual abuse, and obscene speech. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Their sin consists in leading people to neglect what is commanded and commit what is forbidden. NASAFI-FULL (author): Their sin includes quarrels, insults, obscene speech, and falsehood. TABATABAI (author): The Qur’an calls killing, concealing testimony, and false accusation sin, but does not call these great sins; it calls wine’s sin great and describes shirk as a great sin. | mentions 4:48 TABATABAI (author): Wine degrades character and leads to obscenity, violence, crimes, murder, divulging secrets, violating rights, and destroying human laws of life, especially protection of honor, life, and property."}, {"id": "2:219/q15/p4", "position": "Drinking itself is sinful even when no further harm occurs.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): The direct reading is stronger: the sin is attached to wine and gambling, not their consequences, which may not occur even though the sin remains. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعض أهل النظر): Some speculative scholars infer that this verse itself prohibited wine: 7:33 forbids sin, and this verse says wine contains sin. | mentions 7:33 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin found in wine is what is forbidden, not wine itself as that argument requires. | mentions 7:33 RAZI-FULL (author): Razi answers that the question concerns wine generally, so its sin necessarily accompanies it under every circumstance; drinking entails that forbidden consequence and is itself forbidden. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin within wine is forbidden, not wine itself as the argument would require. | mentions 7:33 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Some say the verse prohibits wine by calling it sin, and others equate wine with sin using a poet's line; al-Qurṭubī rejects both because it says wine contains sin, not that wine itself is sin. | mentions 7:33 ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden."}, {"id": "2:219/q15/p5", "position": "The sin is violating its later prohibition.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The verse was revealed before explicit prohibition, and the sin attributed to wine and maysir is the sin caused by them, not a later sin of violating the ban. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ say the sin concerns wine and gambling after prohibition, while their benefits belonged to the earlier period. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the benefits belonged to the period before prohibition, while the sin describes wine after it became forbidden."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q16", "question": "What is the sin or harm associated with gambling?", "turns_on": "The reports emphasize property loss, injustice, enmity, or distraction from worship.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q16/p1", "position": "Other specific harms or consequences are identified.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Before prohibition, their benefits were pleasure and trade; gambling could benefit some while causing others, the gamblers, to lose. TAB-FULL (author): The harms of drinking wine and gambling exceed their gains: drunkenness led people to attack and fight, while gambling brought strife that led them into sin. TAB-FULL (author): The verse was revealed before explicit prohibition, and the sin attributed to wine and maysir is the sin caused by them, not a later sin of violating the ban. ZAJJAJ (author): The sin in wine and gambling outweighs their benefits. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says the verse censured wine and gambling for their greater sin without yet forbidding them; Muslims then drank wine lawfully for its benefits. FARISI-HUJJA (أهل النظر): Some scholars infer prohibition because God forbids sin in 7:33 and this verse calls wine and gambling a great sin. | mentions 7:33 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Al-Fārisī also reads the sin as arising in deeming wine and gambling lawful; only some qualities of otherwise ordinary things are forbidden. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The sin refers to sinful acts committed through wine and gambling and the causes leading to them. MAWARDI-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says wine's sin is that drunkenness makes the drinker harm people, while gambling's sin is withholding what is due and acting unjustly. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Arabs slaughtered a camel, divided it into shares, and gambled over them using arrows. WAHIDI-BASIT (قتادة): Qatada says the verse condemned wine and gambling without prohibiting them, since they were still lawful then. WAHIDI-BASIT (قوم من أهل النظر): Some rationalists argue wine was prohibited here because another verse prohibits sin generally and this verse calls wine and gambling sinful. | mentions 7:33 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The thāʾ reading is supported by the many sins in the wine-and-gambling verse. | mentions 5:91 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The harms and sins caused by wine and gambling outweigh their benefits. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Their sin includes the quarrels, insults, obscene speech, falsehood, and other ev
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
