<<chunk 32, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q15", "question": "What is the sin or harm associated with wine?", "turns_on": "Whether sin lies in drinking itself, its consequences, or violation after a ban.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q15/p1", "position": "Wine obscures reason and religion, causing loss of awareness, worship, and moral restraint.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas explains wine’s sin as the loss of religion suffered by its drinker. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers that wine’s grave sin is loss of reason through intoxication, until the drinker loses awareness of his Lord; he takes this to be Ibn ʿAbbas’s meaning. TAB-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr recounts the staged response: some avoided wine after 2:219 while others drank for its benefits; 4:43 restricted drinking around prayer, and 5:90 then ordered its avoidance, prompting ʿUmar’s exclamation. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 TAB-FULL (أبو القموص زيد بن علي): Abū al-Qamūṣ says wine was revealed about in three stages: after 2:219, some Muslims drank; two intoxicated men spoke incoherently in prayer, prompting 4:43, and another drinker later began lamenting the Badr dead. | mentions 4:43 TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says the verse initially disparaged wine and gambling without banning them; 4:43 then prohibited drunkenness around prayer, and after al-Aḥzāb 5:90 prohibited wine in every amount, whether intoxicating or not. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 ZAJJAJ (author): Wine causes enmity and hatred and obstructs reason, by which one distinguishes things and recognizes duties toward the Creator. IBNABIHATIM (عمر): Umar repeatedly prayed for clarification about wine; revelation progressed from 2:219 to the prayer restriction in 4:43 and the final prohibition in 5:90-91, after which he declared that they abstained because wine wastes wealth and reason. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr explains their sin as neglecting prayer and remembrance of God through wine and gambling. FARISI-HUJJA (سعيد عن قتادة): Qatāda says the verse condemned wine without prohibiting it while it was lawful; the prayer and later al-Māʾida verses then prohibited every amount. | mentions 4:43 FARISI-HUJJA (author): The thāʾ reading is supported by the warning that wine and gambling produce enmity and obstruct remembrance and prayer. | mentions 5:91 THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب ومعاذ بن جبل): Umar, Muadh, and several Ansar asked the Prophet for a ruling on wine and gambling, saying they destroy reason and consume wealth; the verse was revealed in response. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): After the prayer incident, Umar said successive warnings suggested wine would soon be prohibited altogether; some abandoned it because it interfered with prayer. | mentions 4:43 THALABI (author): The grave sin in wine and gambling includes quarrels, insults, obscenity, falsehood, loss of reason, neglect of prayer, and wrongful appropriation of others' property. MAWARDI-FULL (أبو القلوص زيد بن علي): Abu al-Qalus's report says the first verse did not end drinking: two Muslims became drunk and entered prayer speaking unintelligibly, after which 4:43 was revealed and they avoided drinking at prayer times. | mentions 4:43 MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says wine removes the drinker's reason until awareness of the Creator disappears. MAWARDI-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi reports that people continued drinking after the first verse; at a meal hosted by Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Ali led a prayer while drunk and failed to recite al-Kafirun correctly, prompting the prayer restriction in 4:43. | mentions 4:43, 109:1 WAHIDI-ASBAB (author): Al-Wahidi reports that Umar, Muadh ibn Jabal, and some Ansar asked Muhammad for guidance about wine and gambling, saying both impair reason and consume wealth. WAHIDI-BASIT (عمر بن الخطاب ومعاذ بن جبل وسعد بن أبي وقاص): The verse was revealed after Umar, Muʿadh, Saʿd, and others asked the Prophet about wine and gambling, saying they impair reason and take wealth. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (عمر، ومعاذ، وسعد بن أبي وقاص): ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ asked the Messenger for a ruling because wine and gambling destroy reason and strip away wealth. JISHUMI (author): Wine is unquestionably forbidden: it was once permitted, prohibition is necessarily known as part of the religion, its denier is an unbeliever, and its drinker a sinner. JISHUMI (author): Reports from some early authorities say intoxicants were prohibited by the command not to approach prayer while intoxicated; a long report also records some Companions withholding judgment. | mentions 4:43 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The verse was revealed after ʿUmar, Muʿādh ibn Jabal, and a group of Anṣār asked about wine and gambling because they impair reason and consume wealth. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some quit wine altogether after the next restriction; others only stopped at prayer times, drinking after ʿIshāʾ so they were sober by morning or after Fajr so they were sober by Ẓuhr. BAGHAWI-FULL (عمر): After Saʿd complained to the Prophet about the injury, ʿUmar prayed for a clear ruling on wine; this segment ends before the prayer’s sequel. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Baghawī connects the sin in wine and gambling to the enmity, hatred, and diversion from prayer described in 5:91. | mentions 5:91 KASHSHAF-FULL (عمر ومعاذ ونفر من الصحابة): Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked for a ruling because wine destroys reason and property; the verse about sin and benefit followed, and some drank while others abstained. KASHSHAF-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن عوف): At Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf's gathering, drunk companions mishandled the recitation of al-Kafirun at prayer; the prohibition on approaching prayer intoxicated followed. | mentions 4:43 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn Atiyya calls this verse the first step toward prohibiting wine, followed by 4:43's ban on approaching prayer while intoxicated. | mentions 4:43 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Strictly, wine is fermented grape juice uncooked or insufficiently cooked; other things that cloud reason are treated like it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd b. Jubayr recounts a staged response: after this verse some abstained for sin while others drank for benefit; 4:43 restricted drinking around prayers, then 5:90 commanded avoidance and the Prophet declared wine forbidden. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة): One group locates wine’s sin in loss of reason, abuse, slander, harm, and transgression by drinkers, and its benefit in pleasure. TABRISI (جماعة من الصحابة): A group of Companions asked the Prophet about wine and gambling because they destroy reason and strip away wealth; this verse was revealed in response. TABRISI (author): The apparent sense in Imami reports, also adopted by al-Shafiʿi, is any intoxicating drink that covers the mind; even a little is forbidden if much intoxicates. TABRISI (author): The كثير reading is supported by the following verse's account of Satan causing enmity and obstructing prayer and remembrance through wine and gambling, and a report that the Prophet cursed ten involved with wine. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الأنصار وعمر ومعاذ): Another occasion report says a group of Anṣār, including ʿUmar and Muʿādh, asked the Prophet for a ruling because wine removes reason and takes away wealth; this verse was revealed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): One account says wine's sin is that drinking it diminishes one's religion. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Wine's sin includes enmity, hatred, and covering the faculty of reason that enables discrimination. RAZI-FULL (عمر ومعاذ ونفر من الصحابة): A report of the staged prohibition says wine was initially lawful, then Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked for a ruling because it ruins reason and wealth, prompting this verse; some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 RAZI-FULL (ومن الناس من قال): An alternative chronology says this verse prohibited wine first, the prayer verse then prohibited drinking at prayer time (implicitly stopping drinking since an intoxicated person cannot pray), and al-Maida made the ban emphatic. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 RAZI-FULL (author): Because Umar and Muadh sought a ruling on wine as a destroyer of reason and wealth, Razi argues that anything with the same effect must be wine or share its ruling. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi links covering and mixing: what mixes with something veils it; intoxication covers reason and blocks its light from reaching the limbs, so the name denotes an intoxicant. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi says the community recognizes three wine-related verses: two use khamr, while the prayer verse refers to intoxication, confirming that khamr means an intoxicant. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 RAZI-FULL (منهم من قال): Some object that if this verse already prohibited wine, the later prayer restriction and al-Maida prohibition would have been unnecessary. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 RAZI-FULL (author): Razi cites al-Maida's account of wine causing enmity and hatred and diverting people from remembrance and prayer as further harms. | mentions 5:91 RAZI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Razi cites the Prophetic saying that wine is the mother of evils, since loss of reason opens the way to every vice. QURTUBI-FULL (author): He next cites the verse explaining that Satan uses wine and gambling to sow hostility and obstruct remembrance and prayer. | mentions 5:91 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Wine's sin includes quarrels, abuse, indecent and false speech, loss of reason needed to know duties to God, missed prayers, and distraction from God's remembrance. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو حنيفة والثوري وابن أبي ليلى وابن شبرمة وفقهاء الكوفة): These Kufan jurists allow small amounts of non-grape drinks that intoxicate in large amounts and deny the penalty absent deliberate intoxication; Qurtubi calls this weak and rejects it by reason and transmitted evidence. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): At a later banquet hosted by Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, a drunken prayer prompted the prohibition on approaching prayer intoxicated. | mentions 4, :, 4, 3 NASAFI-FULL (علي): Ali said that if 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
