<<chunk 33, part 3 of 0..5>>
. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Their sin is the punishment incurred by consuming wine and gambling; it outweighs benefits such as pleasure, merriment, socializing, gifts, gambling gains, and boasting over abstainers. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة): One group locates wine’s sin in loss of reason, abuse, slander, harm, and transgression by drinkers, and its benefit in pleasure. IBNATIYYA-FULL (حسان بن ثابت): Ḥassān b. Thābit’s poem depicts wine as making drinkers feel like kings and fearless lions, illustrating the pleasure claimed as its benefit. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi answers that immediate worldly benefit does not prevent something from being forbidden; a specific benefit does not negate the general ruling. RAZI-FULL (author): Unlike other sins, repeated drinking strengthens desire and activity; it immerses a person in bodily pleasure and heedlessness of the afterlife, until God makes them forget themselves. | mentions 59:19 RAZI-FULL (author): People attributed many bodily and emotional benefits to wine: strength, digestion, sexual vigor, consolation, courage, generosity, complexion, warmth, and ambition. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Other claimed benefits were aiding digestion and strength, sexual vigor, generosity, courage, clearer complexion, and pleasure. QURTUBI-FULL (حسان بن ثابت): Ḥassān ibn Thābit's poem depicts drinking as making the drinkers kings and lions who do not flinch from battle. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Benefits include earning money, excitement, pleasure, and companionship; wine may embolden the coward, enhance manliness, and strengthen the constitution. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأطباء): Medical writers cited worldly benefits such as relief from sorrow, cheerfulness, digestion, strength, sexual vigor, generosity, complexion, and courage; they also catalogued many harms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān answers that prohibited things may have immediate worldly benefits, and some Companions sought an unmistakable explicit command to make the prohibition unequivocal. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Wine’s sins concern religion, while its benefits are worldly: bodily benefit, digestion, elimination, sharpening some minds, and the pleasure of intoxication; gambling winnings could also support a person or family. IBNKATHIR-FULL (حسان بن ثابت): Hassan ibn Thabit’s pre-Islamic verse depicts drinkers as becoming kings and lions undeterred by battle, illustrating wine’s intoxicating pleasure. BIQAI-FULL (author): The benefits people seek include trading in wine, enjoying its taste, winning money through gambling, aiding the poor, boasting over nonparticipants, and gaining companions and their food, drink, and gifts. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says wine's great sin is loss to religion, while its benefits are pleasure and joy; the religious loss outweighs that enjoyment. TABATABAI (أبو عبد الله عليه السلام): Answering why wine is forbidden despite its pleasure, Imam al-Sadiq says it is the mother of abominations and head of evil, removing reason and leading to every sin. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Pre-Islamic Arabs prized wine’s intoxication and pleasure and gambling’s entertainment, excitement, hospitality, and aid to the poor, while overlooking the harms. STUDYQURAN (al-Qurṭubī): Al-Qurṭubī lists wine’s benefits as aiding digestion, generosity, courage, facial color, sexual activity, and temporary well-being."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q21", "question": "What benefits of gambling does the verse acknowledge?", "turns_on": "Sources emphasize a winner’s windfall, aid to the poor, or other social gains.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q21/p1", "position": "Other specific claimed benefits are given.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): The benefits are what people gain from wine and gambling. MUQATIL (author): Before prohibition, their benefits were pleasure and trade; gambling could benefit some while causing others, the gamblers, to lose. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): Al-maysir means gambling; Ibn Qutayba refers readers to his discussion of its benefit in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid identifies the benefits of maysir as the portions of the camel won in gambling. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says the benefits of wine and gambling mentioned here were those they had before the two were prohibited. ZAJJAJ (author): The sin in wine and gambling outweighs their benefits. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says the verse censured wine and gambling for their greater sin without yet forbidding them; Muslims then drank wine lawfully for its benefits. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The harms and sins caused by wine and gambling outweigh their benefits. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Their sin is the punishment incurred by consuming wine and gambling; it outweighs benefits such as pleasure, merriment, socializing, gifts, gambling gains, and boasting over abstainers. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The question concerns the consequences of engaging in wine and gambling, as indicated by the following explanation of their sin and benefit. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ say the sin concerns wine and gambling after prohibition, while their benefits belonged to the earlier period. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة): Some say the verse’s apparent allowance in mentioning benefits was abrogated by the command to avoid wine and gambling. | mentions 5:90 RAZI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisaʾi read kathīr, many, arguing that wine and gambling bring numerous sins, the Prophet cursed ten connected to wine, and harms contrast with many benefits. | mentions 5:91 RAZI-FULL (author): The signs teach that wine and gambling bring worldly benefits but afterlife harms; reflection should lead people to prefer the next life over this one. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The harms arising from wine and gambling outweigh their expected benefits. NASAFI-FULL (author): The question concerns the consequences of participating in drinking and gambling, as shown by the answer about sin and benefits. NASAFI-FULL (author): Their sin outweighs their benefit because drinkers and gamblers commit sins in many ways. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): As with wine and gambling, some benefit from a forbidden thing does not establish permissibility. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Harali calls maysir a pre-Islamic gambling institution intended to benefit the weak and to gain the spoils of victory. BIQAI-FULL (الأعشى): The author cites al-Aʿsha's line praising people who feed guests in winter and distribute provisions through the gambling shares as evidence for the reported benefit. BIQAI-FULL (القاموس): Al-Qamus says gamblers bought a camel on credit, slaughtered it, and divided it into 28 shares or ten portions; the winning arrows took shares while blank arrows incurred the cost. BIQAI-FULL (القزاز): Al-Qazzāz says al-tawʾam is the second gambling arrow, named for its two stakes and two camel shares; the seven winning arrows carry stakes and shares from one through seven, while three arrows carry no stake. BIQAI-FULL (author): The game remains a gamble even when the number of arrows matches the players: a player may draw none and owe payment, while no one can be sure of winning. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the Companions asked only thirteen questions before the Prophet's death, all answered in the Quran, including wine and gambling, sacred months, orphans, menstruation, spoils, and spending; they asked about what benefited them. | mentions 2:217, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1 BURSEVI (المفسرون): After ʿUmar, Muʿādh, and other Companions asked about wine because it removes reason, the verse on wine and gambling was revealed; some tried to take its benefits while avoiding its sin, while others abstained. BURSEVI (author): The inward benefit of gambling is disregard for both worlds and effacement of worldly forms in the singularity of the Kaaba's imprint. ELMALILI (author): Their benefits include some pleasure and enjoyment, substantial trade, courage for the fearful, strength of temperament, and windfall gains from gambling. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The figurative container preposition fi emphasizes how closely sin and benefit attach to wine and gambling, in their customary use. TABATABAI (author): The benefits people seek in wine and gambling are monetary gains from sale, purchase, and work, along with amusement and pleasure. TABATABAI (author): A common Arabian form of gambling used arrows or lots to divide a slaughtered camel into twenty-eight shares among ten men; seven winning arrows awarded one to seven shares, while three losing arrows had no share and their holders paid the camel’s cost."}, {"id": "2:219/q21/p2", "position": "Camel-lottery proceeds or meat aided the poor and brought social praise.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): The benefit of gambling was what a winner gained and the support thereby given to the poor. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The author prefers the first account: benefits meant wine profits and trade, pleasure and strength, and gambling winnings supporting the poor. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Wine benefits sellers through money from trade and drinkers through pleasure; gambling yields winnings and can support poor people. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): On the alternative account, the meat went to the poor and participants did not eat it; they boasted of the practice and derided one who abstained as al-barim. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Wine’s benefits include pleasure, cheer, making food agreeable, and trade profits; gambling can bring unearned money and support the poor, but losses without compensation provoke resentment and hostility. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A winning arrow took its allotted shares for the poor; sometimes participants gambled for themselves, and those who lost paid the price. The practice sustained the neighborhood’s poor. TABRISI (author): Gambling’s benefit was winning another person’s money without labor or hardship, with the winner able to support the poor. RAZI-FULL (author): The players gave the meat to the poor rather than eating it themselves, took pride in doing s
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
