<<chunk 33, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q17", "question": "How is إِثْمٌۭ كَبِيرٌۭ read and understood?", "turns_on": "The bāʾ reading denotes gravity, while the thāʾ reading denotes multiplicity; both have textual arguments.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q17/p1", "position": "Kathīr with thāʾ means abundant or numerous sins.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (قراء): A variant reading has kathīr (‘much’) in place of kabīr (‘great’) in the phrase about sin. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): The reading with thāʾ, kathīr, suits the counted items of consumed wine and gambling; a verse elsewhere uses akthar for degree or amount. | mentions 6:59 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read kathīr with thāʾ; the rest read kabīr with bāʾ. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The thāʾ reading is supported by the warning that wine and gambling produce enmity and obstruct remembrance and prayer. | mentions 5:91 FARISI-HUJJA (author): The Prophetic report about ten persons involved with wine being cursed supports the kathīr reading. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Since sin is balanced against benefits, kathīr naturally means many harms, like the Qurʾānic description of numerous livestock benefits. | mentions 23:21 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Abū ʿAmr alone reads al-ʿafw nominative; others read it accusative, also reported from Ibn ʿĀmir. A Meccan transmission from Ibn Kathīr has nominative, though Meccans now read accusative. MAWARDI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisa'i read kathīr, with thāʾ, instead of kabīr, with bāʾ. WAHIDI-BASIT (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisaʾi read kathīr with thāʾ; the other readers read kabīr with bāʾ. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The thāʾ reading is supported by the many sins in the wine-and-gambling verse. | mentions 5:91 JISHUMI (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisaʾi read kathir with th; most other readers have kabir with b, which the commentator prefers because of akbar, 4:2, and the majority reading. | mentions 4:2 BAGHAWI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read ithm kathīr, many sins; the other readers read the standard ithm kabīr, a great sin. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A reading has كثير with thāʾ, and Ubay's reading says وأثمهما أقرب. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The reading كثير suits the many kinds of sins committed by people who drink and gamble. IBNATIYYA-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read kathīr (“many”); the Prophet’s curse on wine and ten connected roles supports many sins, as does pairing plural benefits with plural sins. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The codex attributed to Ibn Masʿūd reads kathīr (“many”) at both occurrences, unlike the mainstream agreement on akbar and rejection of akthar. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس وأبو عمرو): Most readers put al-ʿafw in the accusative; Abū ʿAmr alone raises it, and Ibn Kathīr’s reading is reported as differing. TABRISI (أهل الكوفة غير عاصم): Kufan readers other than ʿĀṣim read إثم كثير with thāʾ, while the other readers use bāʾ and read إثم كبير. TABRISI (أبو علي): Abū ʿAlī supports كبير because كبير contrasts with صغير, while كبير denotes a grave sin; Qur'anic examples use صغير and كبير and call grave sins كبائر. The comparison أكبر also supports كبير rather than كثير. TABRISI (author): The كثير reading is supported by the following verse's account of Satan causing enmity and obstructing prayer and remembrance through wine and gambling, and a report that the Prophet cursed ten involved with wine. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Most reciters read kabīr with bāʾ; Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read kathīr with thāʾ. RAZI-FULL (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says khamr is so named because it mixes with the intellect; Razi cites Kathir's verse using the phrase dāʾ mukhāmir as evidence for the sense of intermixture. RAZI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisaʾi read kathīr, many, arguing that wine and gambling bring numerous sins, the Prophet cursed ten connected to wine, and harms contrast with many benefits. | mentions 5:91 QURTUBI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read kathīr with thāʾ; the plural fits plural benefits, and the cited hadith listing ten cursed categories connected with wine supports abundant sins. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Most reciters read al-ʿafw in the accusative; Abū ʿAmr alone reads nominative, reports differ about Ibn Kathīr, and al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, and Ibn Abī Isḥāq also read nominative. BAYDAWI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read kathīr, “much,” with thāʾ instead of kabīr, “great.” NASAFI-FULL (حمزة وعلي): Hamza and ʿAli read كثير, meaning many, in place of كبير. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read إثم كثير (“many sins”); the majority read كبير (“great sin”). كثرة can refer to many offenders, cumulative punishment, many sinful acts, or the many parties involved in wine. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عبد الله بن مسعود): In ʿAbd Allāh’s codex and reading, “أكثر” and “كثير” appear with thāʾ in the comparative and the earlier phrase. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن كثير): Ibn Kathīr is reported with both the accusative reading of the majority and the nominative reading of Abū ʿAmr. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The sin is described as great in one reading and numerous in another; Abū Ḥayyān relates the wording to the Qurʾānic category of major sins. | mentions 4:31 SAMIN-DURR (author): Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read كثير; the others read كبير. The majority form suits sin described as grave, drinking and gambling as major sins, and the seven readers' ب in وإثمهما أكبر. | mentions 4:2, 42:37 SAMIN-DURR (author): The plural benefits contrasts with singular sin, so describing the sin as many matches the collective sense. The author says each reading should be supported without weakening the other, as in the earlier ملك and مالك discussion. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The word al-afw is read in both the accusative and nominative; Ibn Kathir regards both readings as sound, apt, and close in meaning. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathir points back to the many early reports on reflection and taking lessons that he cited under the verse about signs in creation in Al Imran. | mentions 3:190 NASHR (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisai read إثم كثير with thāʾ; the other readers read إثم كبير with bāʾ. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Harali notes readings with bāʾ and thāʾ, كبير and كثير, which indicate both great magnitude and large quantity of sin; either should deter a sound person. BIQAI-FULL (author): An earlier gloss of Kathīr's verse says travel had emaciated the camel until it had no meat, as if two winning arrows had taken all its shares. BIQAI-FULL (كثير): Kathīr's verse portrays a camel passing through midday heat and night travel as though it had won with two of the arrow-drawer's arrows. ALUSI-FULL (author): One reading has “much sin” with thāʾ, and Ubayy reads “their sin is nearer than their benefit.” IBNASHUR-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Most readers have kabir, while Hamza and al-Kisa'i read kathir, using abundance figuratively for intensity of quality. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو ويعقوب): Ibn Kathir in one transmission, Abu Amr, and Yaqub read al-afw nominative as predicate of huwa, taking dha as a relative and matching the answer's case to its construction. TABATABAI (author): A variant reading has kathīr, “much sin,” with thāʾ instead of the written reading kabīr, “great sin.” QIRAAT-ER (author): A dot variant changes bāʾ to thāʾ, changing k-b-r greatness to k-th-r abundance: the sin is abundant rather than great. Against — TAB-FULL (آخرون من أهل البصرة والكوفة): Other Basran and Kufan readers understood the reading as denoting many sins, taking the singular ithm in a collective sense."}, {"id": "2:219/q17/p2", "position": "Kabīr with bāʾ means great or grave sin.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (عظم أهل المدينة وبعض الكوفيين والبصريين): Most Medinese readers and some Kufans and Basrans read kabīr with bāʾ, meaning a grave or great sin. TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers the great-sin reading: agreement on akbar, “greater,” shows magnitude, whereas a numerical comparison would say akthar, “more.” TAB-FULL (author): The comparative phrase “their sin is greater than their benefit” confirms that the earlier description means greatness, not a greater number of sins. ZAJJAJ (author): Wine is prohibited by the Qur’anic text because it is called a great sin, and God explicitly forbids sin; Zajjāj cites 7:33 despite consensus. | mentions 7:33 IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says their great sin is the religious loss incurred by buying them. NAHHAS (author): Al-Ḥaramayn and Abū ʿAmr read kabīr, while the Kufans read kathīr; kabīr is preferable, matching ṣaghīr/kabīr and the established pair kabāʾir/ṣaghāʾir. | mentions 4:2 IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): The reading with bāʾ, kabīr, is supported by the next phrase's akbar rather than akthar. FARISI-HUJJA (أهل النظر): Some scholars infer prohibition because God forbids sin in 7:33 and this verse calls wine and gambling a great sin. | mentions 7:33 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Al-Fārisī favors kabīr: great sin contrasts with small sin, matching kabāʾir and akbar; great sin is also ʿaẓīm, while kathīr would contrast with qalīl. | mentions 54:53, 53:32, 4:31, 31:13, 4:48 THALABI (أهل الكوفة والباقون): Kufans other than Asim read kathīr with thāʾ; the others read kabīr with bāʾ, which Abu Ubayd and Abu Hatim prefer because the verse compares sin and benefit and 4:2 says ḥūban kabīran. | mentions 4:2 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The bāʾ reading is preferable because kabīr contrasts with small and other verses call grave sins kabāʾir; wine and gambling are major sins. | mentions 54:53, 53:32, 4:31 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The bāʾ reading is supported by using ṣaghīr for small, not qalīl for few, and by the contrast of small with great; readers agree on bāʾ in the comparison phrase. JISHUMI (author): Wine and gambling involve great sin alongside benefits: wine gives pleasure and trading profit, while gambling can yield money without labor. JISHUMI (author): Al-Qadi rejects that timing account: a great sin must be forbidden, this verse is more emphatic than a simple prohibition, and any Companion hesit
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
