<<chunk 33, part 5 of 0..5>>
longed to the period before prohibition, while the sin describes wine after it became forbidden. Against — TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas is reported to say that the benefits were before prohibition and the sin came after prohibition; Tabari rejects this chronology. Against — TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ likewise places the benefits before prohibition and the sin after it, an interpretation Tabari rejects. Against — TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the sin after prohibition exceeds the benefit before it; Tabari rejects this reading of the verse."}, {"id": "2:219/q22/p3", "position": "Both are compared after prohibition.", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reads the comparison as applying after prohibition: the sin and benefit of both practices after prohibition are compared."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q23", "question": "Why is their sin greater than their benefit?", "turns_on": "The balance depends on enduring religious punishment, social harms, and the principle of preventing harm.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q23/p1", "position": "Religious loss and lasting punishment outweigh temporary worldly gain.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says their sin outweighs their benefits because of the loss to religion, despite the pleasure and enjoyment people gain. JISHUMI (author): Their sin outweighs their benefit because of the punishment entailed; this is true of every reprehensible thing whose sin exceeds its benefit. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Their sin is the punishment incurred by consuming wine and gambling; it outweighs benefits such as pleasure, merriment, socializing, gifts, gambling gains, and boasting over abstainers. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): God says the sin outweighs the benefit and brings greater harm in the afterlife; Ibn ʿAṭiyya reads this comparison as a prelude to prohibition. TABRISI (author): Their sin outweighs their worldly benefit because it incurs God’s displeasure in the afterlife, leaving only a small, impermanent gain. RAZI-FULL (author): Whether ithm means punishment or the sins that deserve punishment, it can only describe what is forbidden; calling the sin greater than the benefit likewise entails prohibition. QURTUBI-FULL (author): God says the sin is greater and more harmful in the afterlife than the worldly benefits; the great sin is reckoned after prohibition, while the benefits were before it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another explanation is that sin is greater because its punishment endures while worldly benefits disappear; what lasts is greater than what passes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The sin's harm, which leads to Hell, outweighs the benefit that ends with its occasion; a rational person should avoid lasting punishment for temporary gain. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Those benefits do not outweigh the greater harm to intellect and religion; the verse prepares for wine’s categorical prohibition by implication, before 5:90–91 states it explicitly. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says wine's great sin is loss to religion, while its benefits are pleasure and joy; the religious loss outweighs that enjoyment. ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden. ELMALILI (author): The gains are temporary and illusory, while losses include hangovers, disaster, ruined health, worthless profit, addiction, and individual, social, physical, and moral harm. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Wine’s benefits are commercial and economic returns and temporary pleasure for the user. STUDYQURAN (al-Qurṭubī): Al-Qurṭubī lists wine’s benefits as aiding digestion, generosity, courage, facial color, sexual activity, and temporary well-being."}, {"id": "2:219/q23/p2", "position": "The predominance of harm is presented as a reason to avoid or prohibit them.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The sin after prohibition outweighs the benefits before it; their prohibition was revealed a year after this verse. MAWARDI-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr reads it as a pre-prohibition comparison: the sins caused by the practices outweighed their benefits. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك وغيره): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and others say their sin after prohibition outweighs their benefit before prohibition. TABRISI (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak reads the comparison across time: after prohibition, their sin is greater than their benefit before prohibition. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن جبير): Another reading compares sin and benefit before prohibition: the sins arising from their causes already outweighed their benefits. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (بعض أهل المعاني): They argue that the first clause balances sin with benefit, but saying sin is greater makes sin dominant and its benefit negligible by comparison, so the prohibitive side prevails. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأطباء): Medical writers cited worldly benefits such as relief from sorrow, cheerfulness, digestion, strength, sexual vigor, generosity, complexion, and courage; they also catalogued many harms. BIQAI-FULL (author): Because the sin outweighs the benefits, the harms take precedence; the author invokes the principle that preventing harms comes first. ALUSI-FULL (author): Placing sin first, describing it as great or numerous, and delaying benefits while limiting them to people signals the dominance of the harm. ELMALILI (author): Because preventing harm takes precedence over obtaining benefit, reason itself requires these practices to be forbidden; imagined small gains risk certain, sweeping loss. TABATABAI (author): Benefit and harm describe things sought or avoided for something else, unlike good and evil, which describe things sought or avoided for their own sake. ASAD-NOTES (author): Although this verse says their evil outweighs their benefit, Asad points to the clear prohibition of intoxicants and games of chance in 5:90–91. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Islam forbids intoxicating drinks and drugs with comparable or greater effects because their harms outweigh limited benefits that can be obtained elsewhere. Against — BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Some say the excess of harm over benefit is what prohibits wine, since predominant harm entails prohibition; al-Bayḍāwī rejects this as reviving the Muʿtazilite doctrine previously invalidated."}, {"id": "2:219/q23/p3", "position": "Their broad harm to intellect, wealth, worship, and society exceeds private gains.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): The sin in wine and gambling outweighs their benefits. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The harms and sins caused by wine and gambling outweigh their benefits. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): Most readers use kabīr (“great”), fitting wine and gambling as major sins and the following akbar (“greater”); they reject akthar except in Ibn Masʿūd’s codex, which has kathīr in both places. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The harms arising from wine and gambling outweigh their expected benefits. NASAFI-FULL (author): Their sin outweighs their benefit because drinkers and gamblers commit sins in many ways. BURSEVI (author): The al-Taʾwīlāt al-Najmiyya reading says sins outweigh benefits because the sins affect the many while benefits belong to the elect, and the many outnumber the elect. ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking “thus” to refer only to “their sin is greater than their benefit” is remote. TABATABAI (author): The verse does not explain the ruling merely by harm; even on that assumption, it explicitly says the sin outweighs the benefit, so appeal to independent Companion reasoning contradicts the text."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
