<<chunk 33, part 1 of 0..5>>
ation could await a stronger ruling. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): Most readers use kabīr (“great”), fitting wine and gambling as major sins and the following akbar (“greater”); they reject akthar except in Ibn Masʿūd’s codex, which has kathīr in both places. TABRISI (author): Kabir here means a great and abundant burden of sin. TABRISI (author): Wine is called ithm in Arabic, as the cited poem shows; the verse’s description of it as a great sin also supports prohibition. TABRISI (author): The كبير reading is supported by Qur'anic wording about every small and great matter being recorded and by references to major sins. | mentions 54:53, 4:31, 42:37 RAZI-FULL (منهم من قال): Some argue that if the great sin applied whenever wine existed, its prohibition would have had to hold in every religious community. RAZI-FULL (باقي القراء): The other readers say kabīr, great; Razi favors this reading because sin is magnified by greatness, supported by Quranic usage, and all readers use kabīr in the comparative phrase that follows. | mentions 53:32, 4:31, 4:2 QURTUBI-FULL (author): God says the sin is greater and more harmful in the afterlife than the worldly benefits; the great sin is reckoned after prohibition, while the benefits were before it. QURTUBI-FULL (باقي القراء وجمهور الناس): The other reciters and most people read kabīr with bāʾ because drinking and gambling are major sins and the comparative akbar supports this reading. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور القراء): All reciters reject akthar with thāʾ in the comparison, except Ibn Masʿūd's codex, which has kathīr and akthar with thāʾ in both places. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الباقون): The remaining canonical readers read كبير; Abū Ḥayyān says this is apt because drinking wine and gambling are major sins. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says wine's great sin is loss to religion, while its benefits are pleasure and joy; the religious loss outweighs that enjoyment. ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Kabir describes an immaterial sin metaphorically: it means exceptionally intense in its kind. TABATABAI (author): Meccan 16:67 mentions intoxicating drink and good provision; al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī treats this as an early, non-explicit stage in wine’s gradual prohibition. | mentions 16:67 TABATABAI (author): Al-Baqara 2:219 came after 4:43 and establishes prohibition by decisively calling wine a great sin, against the background of the earlier Meccan prohibition of sin. | mentions 4:43, 7:33 TABATABAI (author): Even if 2:219 alone were insufficient to establish prohibition, its explicit naming of sin follows 7:33’s earlier general prohibition; wine is a complete instance of great sin. | mentions 7:33, 4:48 TABATABAI (author): The Qur’an calls killing, concealing testimony, and false accusation sin, but does not call these great sins; it calls wine’s sin great and describes shirk as a great sin. | mentions 4:48 Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects attempts to rank one of the two canonical readings above the other, since both are God’s speech."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q18", "question": "Are there other readings in the comparison of sin and benefit?", "turns_on": "The comparative reading and attributed codex variants affect whether magnitude, number, or nearness is expressed.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q18/p1", "position": "Ibn Masʿūd’s codex has akthar, more numerous, with kathīr.", "reasons": "IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): The reading with bāʾ, kabīr, is supported by the next phrase's akbar rather than akthar. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): The reading with thāʾ, kathīr, suits the counted items of consumed wine and gambling; a verse elsewhere uses akthar for degree or amount. | mentions 6:59 IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): Most readers use kabīr (“great”), fitting wine and gambling as major sins and the following akbar (“greater”); they reject akthar except in Ibn Masʿūd’s codex, which has kathīr in both places. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The codex attributed to Ibn Masʿūd reads kathīr (“many”) at both occurrences, unlike the mainstream agreement on akbar and rejection of akthar. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور القراء): All reciters reject akthar with thāʾ in the comparison, except Ibn Masʿūd's codex, which has kathīr and akthar with thāʾ in both places. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عبد الله بن مسعود): In ʿAbd Allāh’s codex and reading, “أكثر” and “كثير” appear with thāʾ in the comparative and the earlier phrase."}, {"id": "2:219/q18/p2", "position": "A reading attributed to Ubayy says their sin is nearer than their benefit.", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A reading has كثير with thāʾ, and Ubay's reading says وأثمهما أقرب. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبي): A reading attributed to Ubayy has أقرب (“nearer”) in place of أكبر. ITQAN (أبي بن كعب): Ubayy ibn Kaʿb says plural الرياح denotes mercy throughout the Quran, while singular الريح denotes punishment. ALUSI-FULL (author): One reading has “much sin” with thāʾ, and Ubayy reads “their sin is nearer than their benefit.”"}, {"id": "2:219/q18/p3", "position": "The canonical comparison reads akbar, greater.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tabari prefers the great-sin reading: agreement on akbar, “greater,” shows magnitude, whereas a numerical comparison would say akthar, “more.” TAB-FULL (author): The comparative phrase “their sin is greater than their benefit” confirms that the earlier description means greatness, not a greater number of sins. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس): Most readers use kabīr (“great”), fitting wine and gambling as major sins and the following akbar (“greater”); they reject akthar except in Ibn Masʿūd’s codex, which has kathīr in both places."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q19", "question": "How does the form وَمَنَٰفِعُ express benefit?", "turns_on": "The plural and derived form of benefits are interpreted as number or intensified benefit.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q19/p1", "position": "Its form expresses intensified or abundant benefit, whether analyzed as a verbal noun or place noun.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Manafiʿ may be a verbal noun whose form intensifies benefit, or a place noun denoting abundant benefit; either way it is stronger than nafʿ."}, {"id": "2:219/q19/p2", "position": "Its plural form contrasts with the singular benefit in the comparison, where magnitude rather than number matters.", "reasons": "TABATABAI (author): Although benefits is plural earlier, the comparison says benefit in the singular: plurality does not affect greatness, so the quantity of benefits is left out of the comparison."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q20", "question": "What benefits of wine does the verse acknowledge?", "turns_on": "Sources variously emphasize trade profit, drinking pleasure, and perceived bodily or social effects.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q20/p1", "position": "Wine yielded trade proceeds, sale profit, or other monetary returns.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says wine’s benefits were pleasure and price, while maysir’s were its gambling winnings. TAB-FULL (author): Before prohibition, wine’s benefits included its price and the pleasure of drinking it. ZAJJAJ (author): Wine's benefits include pleasure and profit from trading in it. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid explains the benefits as the price of wine and the camel meat people obtained through gambling. IBNABIHATIM (ابن أبي زائدة): A transmission from Mujahid through Ibn Abi Zayda differs, identifying the benefit as wine's price before prohibition. FARISI-HUJJA (أنس بن مالك عن النبي): Anas reports that the Prophet cursed ten people involved in wine, including buyers, sellers, producers, carriers, servers, and those who consume its price. THALABI (author): Wine's benefits included trade and pleasure, illustrated by al-A'sha's contrasting lines on its morning misery and evening enjoyment. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Wine's benefits include its sale price and trading profit, as well as the pleasure of drinking it. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The author prefers the first account: benefits meant wine profits and trade, pleasure and strength, and gambling winnings supporting the poor. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Wine benefits sellers through money from trade and drinkers through pleasure; gambling yields winnings and can support poor people. JISHUMI (author): Wine and gambling involve great sin alongside benefits: wine gives pleasure and trading profit, while gambling can yield money without labor. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Wine’s benefits include pleasure, cheer, making food agreeable, and trade profits; gambling can bring unearned money and support the poor, but losses without compensation provoke resentment and hostility. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid identifies the benefit of wine as the money earned from its sale. IBNATIYYA-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report says the Prophet cursed wine and ten associated people: its seller, buyer, purchaser for another, pressers, those for whom it is pressed, server, drinker, carrier, recipient, and one who consumes its price; Ibn ʿAṭiyya gives no grading. TABRISI (author): Wine’s benefits were its sale proceeds and the pleasure, exhilaration, and strength people thought drinking brought. TABRISI (النبي): A Prophetic report curses ten wine-related parties: buyer and recipient, presser and commissioner, server and requester, carrier and recipient, and the consumer of its price. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Wine benefits people through profit from its sale and bodily enjoyment. RAZI-FULL (author): Wine brought merchants profit because imported wine sold at high prices, and buyers who did not haggle were considered generous and honorable. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The soundest account of wine's worldly benefit is trade profit: merchants brought it cheaply from Syria and sold it at high prices in the Hijaz, where buyers did not bargain. QURTUBI-FULL (ر
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
