<<chunk 33, part 4 of 0..5>>
o, and disparaged nonparticipants as baram. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Another view says gambling helped the poor because winners did not eat their shares but distributed the camel's meat to people in need. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Sometimes people gambled for themselves, so the person whose arrow did not win paid the camel's entire price; the practice fed poor people of the clan, as al-Aʿshā's verse says. NASAFI-FULL (author): Wine benefits include trade and drinking pleasure; gambling may benefit the poor or bring easy money. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another claimed benefit is aid to the needy: winners of the camel-meat game distributed their share to the poor. SAMIN-DURR (author): A marked lot won its assigned share; a blank meant the person paid toward the camel. This was done in winter scarcity, with the meat given to the poor, not eaten by participants; they took pride in it and called nonparticipants البرم. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Wine’s sins concern religion, while its benefits are worldly: bodily benefit, digestion, elimination, sharpening some minds, and the pleasure of intoxication; gambling winnings could also support a person or family. BIQAI-FULL (author): The benefits people seek include trading in wine, enjoying its taste, winning money through gambling, aiding the poor, boasting over nonparticipants, and gaining companions and their food, drink, and gifts. BIQAI-FULL (أهل المعرفة): Some people of insight said the benefit of gambling was that, during winter and famine, Arabs wagered camels and gave the meat to the poor, improving their circumstances. BIQAI-FULL (غيره): Another account says gamblers gave the meat to the poor without eating it themselves, boasted of the generosity, and called a person who abstained al-barm. BURSEVI (author): Gambling could bring unearned money and meat for the poor, since winners distributed the camel's meat to people in need. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The spending question accompanied the wine-and-gambling question, so its answer is joined by waw; banning them threatened aid to the poor, making proper spending relevant. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The waw also answers the expectation that banning wine and gambling would remove aid to the poor by directing people to legitimate giving. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): As wine and gambling began to be prohibited, people who used them to aid the poor asked what to give; God answered “al-afw,” meaning surplus after needs or a suitable part of it. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Pre-Islamic Arabs prized wine’s intoxication and pleasure and gambling’s entertainment, excitement, hospitality, and aid to the poor, while overlooking the harms. STUDYQURAN (author): In maysir, players draw arrows to divide meat; the loser pays without receiving meat and is mocked, while winners give their shares to the poor as generosity. STUDYQURAN (al-Qurṭubī): Al-Qurṭubī says gambling can produce wealth without effort and benefit the poor through customary meat distribution by winners."}, {"id": "2:219/q21/p3", "position": "Winners gained money or camel meat without labor.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says wine’s benefits were pleasure and price, while maysir’s were its gambling winnings. TAB-FULL (author): Gambling’s benefit was the share of camel meat won by the players, who wagered on a camel, slaughtered it when a player won, and divided it into ten lots according to the arrows. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Mujahid explains the benefits as the price of wine and the camel meat people obtained through gambling. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One account of gambling's benefit is obtaining money without labor. JISHUMI (أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim describes a camel divided by ten arrows: seven marked arrows carried known shares and three carried none; winners got the corresponding meat share and paid its price, while those with blank arrows got no meat and paid nothing. Outsiders were called burma, while the players were called aysar. JISHUMI (author): Wine and gambling involve great sin alongside benefits: wine gives pleasure and trading profit, while gambling can yield money without labor. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): These customs were benefits of maysir, but the practice still consumed wealth unlawfully. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Gambling's benefit is that a person can acquire money without effort. RAZI-FULL (author): The arrows were shaken in a bag by a trusted person, then drawn for each player; winners took their marked meat shares, while blank-arrow players received nothing and paid for the whole camel. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says a pre-Islamic man wagered his family and property; the winner took the loser’s wealth and family, and the verse was revealed about this. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maysir offered a share without work: the group bought a camel, winners received meat without paying, while the final loser paid the full price and got no meat. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): One stated benefit of gambling is that a winner becomes wealthy without work or exertion. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Benefits include money from trading in wine, gambling, and other gains; even prohibited things have some benefit, especially when people naturally desire them or grow accustomed to them. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Maysir was played with a camel bought on credit, divided into 28 portions; ten arrows, seven marked with shares and three blank, were drawn, with winners receiving meat shares and losers paying the cost. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Gambling offered some material benefits through entertainment, food, and drink, but brought far greater sin and harm, including idleness, hostility, neglect of worship, wasted time, lost wealth, and broken households. | mentions 5:91"}]}
{"id": "2:219/q22", "question": "When do the compared sin and benefit apply?", "turns_on": "The chronological question is whether both qualities coexist, whether benefits precede the ban and sin follows it, or whether both are post-ban.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q22/p1", "position": "Sin and benefit coexist before prohibition or in the same state.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Before prohibition, their benefits were pleasure and trade; gambling could benefit some while causing others, the gamblers, to lose. TAB-FULL (author): Before prohibition, wine’s benefits included its price and the pleasure of drinking it. IBNABIHATIM (ابن أبي زائدة): A transmission from Mujahid through Ibn Abi Zayda differs, identifying the benefit as wine's price before prohibition. MAWARDI-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr reads it as a pre-prohibition comparison: the sins caused by the practices outweighed their benefits. JISHUMI (author): Another view holds that benefit and sin coexist in one state, while prohibition is a separate matter, as water benefits a fasting person if he drinks it. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Another explanation says the sin exceeded the benefit even before prohibition because of the enmity and hatred they caused. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): God says the sin outweighs the benefit and brings greater harm in the afterlife; Ibn ʿAṭiyya reads this comparison as a prelude to prohibition. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ say the sin concerns wine and gambling after prohibition, while their benefits belonged to the earlier period. TABRISI (author): Their sin outweighs their worldly benefit because it incurs God’s displeasure in the afterlife, leaving only a small, impermanent gain. TABRISI (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿid ibn Jubayr says both refer to the pre-prohibition period: the sin caused by them exceeds their benefit. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (سعيد بن جبير، الضحاك، مقاتل): One reading compares post-prohibition sin with pre-prohibition benefit. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن جبير): Another reading compares sin and benefit before prohibition: the sins arising from their causes already outweighed their benefits. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ assign the sin to the period after prohibition and the benefits to the earlier period. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers the apparent sense: sin and benefit are both being reported as present, and the sin is wrongdoing that brings punishment. ALUSI-FULL (author): Their benefits include pleasure, joy, digestion, improved complexion, sexual vigor, courage, generosity, and helping the weak; these benefits exist before and after prohibition, and no proof says prohibition removes them."}, {"id": "2:219/q22/p2", "position": "The benefit was before prohibition and the sin after it.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The sin after prohibition outweighs the benefits before it; their prohibition was revealed a year after this verse. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas distinguishes the benefits as belonging to the period before prohibition and the sins to the period after prohibition. IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): Muqatil contrasts the greater sin after prohibition with the benefits they had before prohibition. THALABI (الضحاك والربيع): Al-Dahhak and al-Rabi say the benefits occurred before prohibition, while the sin applies after prohibition. WAHIDI-BASIT (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabiʿ and al-Dahhak say the sin became great after prohibition, while benefits existed before it. JISHUMI (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabiʿ and al-Dahhak say the benefits were present before prohibition and the sin after prohibition. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك وغيره): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and others say their sin after prohibition outweighs their benefit before prohibition. TABRISI (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak reads the comparison across time: after prohibition, their sin is greater than their benefit before prohibition. QURTUBI-FULL (author): God says the sin is greater and more harmful in the afterlife than the worldly benefits; the great sin is reckoned after prohibition, while the benefits were before it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس وسعيد بن جبير والضحاك ومقاتل): Ibn ʿAbbās, Saʿīd ibn Jubayr, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, and Muqātil say sin after prohibition exceeds benefit before it. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the benefits be
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
