<<chunk 34, part 5 of 0..5>>
 is one interrogative expression and ماذا ينفقون functions like ما ينفقون, asking what they spend; the answer is accusative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عمر بن الخطاب): One occasion report says ʿUmar asked God to give a decisive clarification about wine, after which this verse was revealed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو علي): The accusative treats mādhā as accusative and al-ʿafw as its answer, as in answering “What did you spend?” with “a dirham.” RAZI-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffal compares this answer to describing a person's beliefs and character when asked what they are like: the response gives relevant qualities rather than a literal definition. RAZI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw with nominative wāw, parsing mā as a relative pronoun and the question as “what is it that they spend?”; others read it accusative as the answer “they spend the surplus.” QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw means what is easy and readily available, what is surplus without hardship; spend what remains after needs without harming yourself and becoming dependent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The spending question had already been asked; this answer now clarifies the quantity or amount to spend. | mentions 2:215 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān objects to Ibn ʿAṭiyya’s paraphrase “al-ʿafw is your spending,” since the question asks what is spent, not the act of spending; the mixed case combinations are permissible, not weak. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Most readers vocalize العفو in the accusative as the object of an omitted ينفقون; this matches ماذا as an interrogative object asking what they spend. BIQAI-FULL (author): The repeated question about what to spend signals repeated prompting and the great importance of spending, which is among the principal supports of jihad. BIQAI-FULL (author): The conjunction links this spending question to the earlier question and answer about spending in 2:215, which made another spending question expectable; questions about orphans and menstruation lacked that setup. | mentions 2:215 BIQAI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): When a woman asked what she could give from her husband's wealth, the Prophet answered fresh fruit: it may be eaten or gifted before it spoils. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Asked about one dinar, the Prophet directs a man to give first to himself, then his child, wife, and servant, and finally use his judgment; al-Hakim authenticated the report. SUYUTI-LUBAB (يحيى): Yaḥyā relates that Muʿādh b. Jabal and Thaʿlaba asked what to spend from their wealth because they had dependents and families; this verse was revealed. ALUSI-FULL (معاذ بن جبل وثعلبة): A report through Abān from Yaḥyā says Muʿādh and Thaʿlaba, with households and dependents, asked the Prophet how much of their wealth to spend. ALUSI-FULL (author): The answer shows that the question asks the quality or amount of what to spend: “what” functions as a question about a description, as in asking what someone is and answering “generous.” ELMALILI (author): The question can ask either what causes or recipients should receive spending, or what amount or property should be spent; the first was answered earlier, the latter now. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The spending question accompanied the wine-and-gambling question, so its answer is joined by waw; banning them threatened aid to the poor, making proper spending relevant. TABATABAI (author): The question and answer about what to spend match the earlier question answered by saying that whatever good is spent goes to parents and relatives. | mentions 2:215"}, {"id": "2:219/q26/p2", "position": "ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked about the amount after the earlier spending verse.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (عمرو بن الجموح): After the answer about parents and kin, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamuh asked how much to spend, prompting revelation of say, the surplus. | mentions 2:215 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (عمرو بن الجموح): After the verse about spending for parents and relatives, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked again how much should be spent. | mentions 2:215 TABRISI (عمرو بن الجموح): ʿAmr ibn al-Jamuh asked what should be spent in jihad; another report says the question concerned charity. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās identifies the person who asked what to spend as ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The earlier question asks whom to spend on and is answered accordingly; this question asks how much to spend, concerning ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ, who had asked about the amount. | mentions 2:215 QURTUBI-FULL (author): After 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked how much to spend, and the answer about al-ʿafw addressed that amount. | mentions 2:215 BAYDAWI-FULL (عمرو بن الجموح): Amr ibn al-Jamuh is said to have asked first about what to spend and whom to give it to, then about how to spend. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The questioner is identified either as ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ or, more apparently, the believers collectively, as the plural verb suggests. BURSEVI (author): The charity question continues the topic of what to spend raised by the earlier verse; when 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked what he should spend, prompting the instruction al-ʿafw. | mentions 2:215 ALUSI-FULL (author): This question coordinates with the earlier one as a new topic; another report links it to ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ, who first asked about recipients and then about the amount to give. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Another view identifies Amr ibn al-Jamuh as questioner, answered in 2:215 and here, with each answer suited to context. | mentions 2:215"}, {"id": "2:219/q26/p3", "position": "Companions or believers collectively asked how much to give, for charity or God’s cause.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): After the Prophet encouraged charity without making it obligatory, people asked what to spend and whom to give it to. THALABI (الحسن وقتادة وابن أبي إسحاق وأبو عمرو): These readers use the nominative al-afwu, meaning that what people spend is the surplus; al-Suddi prefers this reading, supported by 16:24. | mentions 16:24 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): When the Prophet urged them to give charity, people asked what they should spend, and the answer was al-ʿafw. RAZI-FULL (author): The spending question had already been answered by identifying the recipient; it is repeated here to answer how much to give. Observing the call to generosity, people asked whether they must give everything or only part, and God accepts al-ʿafw. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The question follows discussion of charitable spending and fighting because wine and gambling consume wealth that might otherwise go to charity or jihad. | mentions 2:215, 2:216 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Asked what to spend, believers are told to give whatever is easy for them to part with; this reflects that religion imposes no undue hardship. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the Companions asked only thirteen questions before the Prophet's death, all answered in the Quran, including wine and gambling, sacred months, orphans, menstruation, spoils, and spending; they asked about what benefited them. | mentions 2:217, 2:220, 2:222, 8:1 DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that Companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked how much to give, and this verse answered them. SUYUTI-LUBAB (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked what portion of their wealth they should give; the answer was to spend the surplus. ALUSI-FULL (إبن عباس): Ibn Isḥāq reports from Ibn ʿAbbās that companions ordered to spend in God’s path asked how much to give; before the verse, some spent everything and then lacked food or charity. TABATABAI (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked how much to give; the verse answered that they should give the surplus, after one man had given away even what he needed to eat. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): As wine and gambling began to be prohibited, people who used them to aid the poor asked what to give; God answered “al-afw,” meaning surplus after needs or a suitable part of it."}, {"id": "2:219/q26/p4", "position": "Muʿādh ibn Jabal and Thaʿlaba asked because they had dependents.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (معاذ بن جبل، ثعلبة): A report says Muadh ibn Jabal and Tha'laba, concerned about their dependents, asked the Prophet what they should spend, occasioning the spending question in this verse. IBNKATHIR-FULL (معاذ بن جبل وثعلبة): A report reaching Yahya says Muadh and Thaʿlaba asked how much to spend given their dependents and servants, and this question occasioned the verse. DURR-FULL (يحيى): Yahya says he had heard that Muadh ibn Jabal and Tha'laba asked what they should spend, since they had dependents and enslaved people. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن أبي حاتم): Ibn Abi Hatim reports that Muadh ibn Jabal and Thaʿlaba ibn Ghanima asked what should be spent. TABATABAI (يحيى): Yahya reports that Muadh ibn Jabal and Tha'laba, supporting dependents and servants, asked the Prophet how much of their property to spend, prompting the verse."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
