<<chunk 34, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q24", "question": "Does this verse itself prohibit wine and gambling?", "turns_on": "The argument turns on whether calling the practices sin already forbids them or only warns before an explicit later command.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q24/p1", "position": "The verse itself establishes prohibition by calling the practices sinful or making their sin dominant.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The sin after prohibition outweighs the benefits before it; their prohibition was revealed a year after this verse. ABDURRAZZAQ (مجاهد وقتادة): Mujahid and Qatada report that when this verse came, some people continued drinking and others abstained, until wine was prohibited in al-Maʾida. TAB-FULL (author): The verse was revealed before explicit prohibition, and the sin attributed to wine and maysir is the sin caused by them, not a later sin of violating the ban. TAB-FULL (أبو القموص زيد بن علي): Abū al-Qamūṣ’s report continues with the man’s verse lament for Badr’s dead; the Messenger rushed to him, he vowed never to drink again, and 5:90–91 prohibited wine, whereupon ʿUmar said they had stopped. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 TAB-FULL (قتادة ومجاهد): Qatada and a transmitter from Mujahid say that after this verse some people drank wine and others abstained until its prohibition in Sūrat al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 ZAJJAJ (قوم): Some say this verse only discouraged wine and gambling, with their prohibition made explicit later in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 ZAJJAJ (قوم): Others say the prohibition is already conveyed here and is clarified by the Book elsewhere. ZAJJAJ (author): Wine is prohibited by the Qur’anic text because it is called a great sin, and God explicitly forbids sin; Zajjāj cites 7:33 despite consensus. | mentions 7:33 IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the statement about sin and benefits in this verse was abrogated by the final prohibition in 5:90. | mentions 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar recounts three stages: this verse, then the ban on approaching prayer intoxicated, then the final prohibition, which the Prophet announced as making wine forbidden. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (أنس بن مالك): Anas reports that people drank wine after the initial verse, then left it when the prohibition in al-Ma'ida was announced; their drink was date nabidh called fadikh. | mentions 5:90 FARISI-HUJJA (أهل النظر): Some scholars infer prohibition because God forbids sin in 7:33 and this verse calls wine and gambling a great sin. | mentions 7:33 MAWARDI-FULL (قوم من أهل النظر): Some rationalist interpreters hold that wine was prohibited by this verse. JISHUMI (الحسن): Hasan and a group say this verse prohibited wine; al-Qadi chooses this view because calling it a great sin implies prohibition. JISHUMI (author): Al-Qadi rejects that timing account: a great sin must be forbidden, this verse is more emphatic than a simple prohibition, and any Companion hesitation could await a stronger ruling. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 BAGHAWI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): After this verse descended, the Prophet said that God had begun to address wine’s prohibition; some gave it up over its sin, while others continued because of its benefits. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn Atiyya calls this verse the first step toward prohibiting wine, followed by 4:43's ban on approaching prayer while intoxicated. | mentions 4:43 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn ʿAṭiyya places the verse in the staged prohibition of wine, citing the later commands to avoid it and the Prophet’s declaration that it was forbidden. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعض أهل النظر): Some speculative scholars infer that this verse itself prohibited wine: 7:33 forbids sin, and this verse says wine contains sin. | mentions 7:33 TABRISI (author): Wine is called ithm in Arabic, as the cited poem shows; the verse’s description of it as a great sin also supports prohibition. TABRISI (author): Calling the sin great is itself evidence of prohibition, since a major sin is prohibited without disagreement. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Gambling follows the same disagreement as wine; if this verse prohibits wine, it prohibits gambling too, while on the disapproval reading al-Māʾida explicitly prohibits gambling. | mentions 5:90 RAZI-FULL (عمر ومعاذ ونفر من الصحابة): A report of the staged prohibition says wine was initially lawful, then Umar, Muadh, and other Companions asked for a ruling because it ruins reason and wealth, prompting this verse; some drank and others abstained. | mentions 16:67 RAZI-FULL (سعد بن أبي وقاص وعمر): After intoxicated Ansar, including Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas, boasted and exchanged insulting verse, an Ansari split Saʿd's head with a camel jaw; Umar prayed for decisive clarification, and the final prohibition followed, to which he assented. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 RAZI-FULL (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas reports that this verse came down after wine had already been prohibited. RAZI-FULL (author): Since Companion reports conflict, Razi says they should be set aside in favor of the apparent wording of the Qur'an and the Prophet's Sunna. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi argues that wine contains sin, and sin is forbidden by al-Aʿraf 7:33; together the verses prove wine prohibited. | mentions 7:33 RAZI-FULL (منهم من قال): Some deny that the verse prohibits wine: it says wine contains sin rather than that drinking is sinful, so the sin could be incidental rather than a ban on drinking. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): Razi cites Ibn Abbas as reporting that the verse was revealed to prohibit wine; no report says the Companions hesitated, and senior Companions could seek a stronger statement as Abraham sought reassurance about resurrection. | mentions 2:260 QURTUBI-FULL (قوم من أهل النظر): Some legal theorists infer that 2:219 prohibits wine because it says wine contains sin, and 7:33 declares sin forbidden. | mentions 7:33 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Their sin consists in leading people to neglect what is commanded and commit what is forbidden. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن جبير): Ibn Jubayr describes a staged prohibition: some abstained after this verse, while others drank for its benefits until prayer-time restriction and then the final command to avoid it. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says this verse was revealed after wine had already been prohibited. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān’s apparent reading is prohibitive: consuming either entails grave sin, and anything sinful or containing sin is forbidden; sin outweighs benefit. | mentions 6:151 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan states the general rule that whatever contains sin is forbidden. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مخالفو التحريم): Those denying that the verse prohibits argue that a forbidden thing cannot have benefits and that the Companions waited for the prayer and al-Māʾida verses before abstaining. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 DURR-FULL (أنس): Anas reports that the Companions drank wine; this verse came down, they said they would drink what benefited them, and after 5:90 prohibited it they declared they had stopped. | mentions 5:90 DURR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha says that when al-Baqara was revealed it contained wine's prohibition, so the Messenger of God forbade it. DURR-FULL (author): After some Muslims drank, fought, and spoke offensively, 5:90 prohibited wine. | mentions 5:90 ALUSI-FULL (author): Raw date infusion, called sakar, is forbidden; the author invokes the Companions’ consensus and the verse’s initial, pre-prohibition setting. | mentions 16:67 ALUSI-FULL (بعض العلماء): Some scholars infer that the verse itself prohibits wine because the greater harm outweighs its benefit; others add that “great sin” means punishment or its cause, which applies only to the forbidden. ELMALILI (author): The verse entails legal prohibition, but by itself does not state an unambiguous intrinsic ban; some Companions missed the legal force of its rational warning until 5:90–91 gave an explicit, absolute command. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 TABATABAI (author): Al-Baqara 2:219 came after 4:43 and establishes prohibition by decisively calling wine a great sin, against the background of the earlier Meccan prohibition of sin. | mentions 4:43, 7:33 TABATABAI (author): Even if 2:219 alone were insufficient to establish prohibition, its explicit naming of sin follows 7:33’s earlier general prohibition; wine is a complete instance of great sin. | mentions 7:33, 4:48 TABATABAI (علي بن يقطين): Ali ibn Yaqtin recounts the Mahdi questioning Abu al-Hasan about wine's Qur'anic prohibition; the Imam identifies Qur'anic sin with wine and cites 2:219, and the Mahdi acknowledges the Ahl al-Bayt's learning. | mentions 7:33, 2:219 ASAD-NOTES (author): Although this verse says their evil outweighs their benefit, Asad points to the clear prohibition of intoxicants and games of chance in 5:90–91. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The verse stresses that wine and gambling do more harm than good; some people therefore gave up wine even before the final prohibition. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): God’s explanations of the wisdom behind commands help people act consciously and apply divine intent without error where no explicit ruling exists. Against — IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin found in wine is what is forbidden, not wine itself as that argument requires. | mentions 7:33 Against — QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin within wine is forbidden, not wine itself as the argument would require. | mentions 7:33 Against — QURTUBI-FULL (author): Some say the verse prohibits wine by calling it sin, and others equate wine with sin using a poet's line; al-Qurṭubī rejects both because it says wine contains sin, not that wine itself is sin. | mentions 7:33"}, {"id": "2:219/q24/p2", "position": "It censures or discourages them; explicit prohibition came later in al-Māʾida.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says drinking continued after 2:219; an intoxicated recitation at ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf’
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
