<<chunk 34, part 4 of 0..5>>
 ibn ʿAwf hosted drinkers; an intoxicated imam misrecited the disavowal sūra, prompting 4:43’s ban on approaching prayer while drunk. | mentions 4:43 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن جبير): Ibn Jubayr describes a staged prohibition: some abstained after this verse, while others drank for its benefits until prayer-time restriction and then the final command to avoid it. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 DURR-FULL (author): The account describes staged restriction: people avoided wine at prayer, drank after evening prayer, and were sober by noon, before 4:43 restricted prayer while intoxicated. | mentions 4:43 BURSEVI (المفسرون): After the prayer-time restriction, some still drank outside prayer hours, expecting to sober up between the evening or dawn prayer and the next prayer. | mentions 4:43 ALUSI-FULL (بعض الروايات): Another account says the verse first came after the Prophet arrived in Medina; people continued drinking until ʿAbd al-Raḥmān’s feast, where intoxicated ʿAlī omitted “no” while leading prayer, prompting 4:43. | mentions 4:43 TABATABAI (author): The Medinan 4:43 bars drinking or drunkenness at prayer, limiting it at the best time and place; it precedes al-Baqara and al-Māʾida, since a specific ban after a universal one would reverse the gradual move from ease to severity. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 TABATABAI (author): Al-Baqara 2:219 came after 4:43 and establishes prohibition by decisively calling wine a great sin, against the background of the earlier Meccan prohibition of sin. | mentions 4:43, 7:33"}, {"id": "2:219/q25/p3", "position": "Individual reports preserve different names, places, actions, or details of these incidents.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (أبو القموص زيد بن علي): Abū al-Qamūṣ’s report continues with the man’s verse lament for Badr’s dead; the Messenger rushed to him, he vowed never to drink again, and 5:90–91 prohibited wine, whereupon ʿUmar said they had stopped. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 THALABI (author): At Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf's meal, companions became intoxicated; the prayer leader recited Surat al-Kafirun but omitted la, prompting the ban on prayer while drunk. | mentions 4:43 THALABI (author): Some continued drinking outside prayer. One Muslim drank, lamented those killed at Badr in verse, and vowed never to drink again when the Prophet rushed over angrily. THALABI (علي): Ali reports that intoxicated Hamza slaughtered and ate Ali's camels, which Ali planned to sell to fund his marriage to Fatima; Hamza insulted Ali's lineage, and the Prophet compensated him. THALABI (سعد بن أبي وقاص): Atban's feast included wine and drunken boasting; Saʿd recited a poem insulting the Ansar, and an Ansari wounded him with a camel jawbone. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): After Saʿd complained, Umar prayed for a clear ruling; final prohibition came in al-Maida days after the Trench, and Umar declared they had stopped. | mentions 5:90 THALABI (أنس): Anas says wine was cherished but, at its prohibition, people poured it into streets or broke and washed vessels; after rain Medina's alleys smelled of wine. | mentions 5:90 MAWARDI-FULL (author): Continuing Abu al-Qalus's account, a man drank, lamented those killed at Badr in verse, and the Prophet arrived alarmed; the man sought God's and the Prophet's protection and vowed never to drink again. MAWARDI-FULL (السدي): In al-Suddi's report, a drunken dispute at a meal hosted by Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas led an Anṣari to strike Sa'd's nose with a camel jawbone; the prohibition in 5:90 was then revealed. | mentions 5:90 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): At ʿItbān ibn Mālik’s feast, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ and others drank after eating camel’s head; Saʿd boasted and recited poetry insulting the Anṣār, and a man struck and split his head with a camel jawbone. KASHSHAF-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن عوف): At Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf's gathering, drunk companions mishandled the recitation of al-Kafirun at prayer; the prohibition on approaching prayer intoxicated followed. | mentions 4:43 KASHSHAF-FULL (عمر): After Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas was struck with a camel jawbone during a drunken gathering, he complained to the Prophet and Umar prayed for a clear ruling on wine. KASHSHAF-FULL (علي): Ali said he would not pray by a structure whose well had received a drop of wine, nor graze land where wine had entered the sea and then dried. KASHSHAF-FULL (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar said that if he put his finger into wine, it would not follow him; al-Zamakhshari calls this true faith and connects it with fearing God fully. RAZI-FULL (عبد الرحمن بن عوف): At a meal hosted by Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, guests drank, became intoxicated, and one recited the opening of al-Kafirun incorrectly; this occasioned the prayer-time restriction. | mentions 4:43 RAZI-FULL (سعد بن أبي وقاص وعمر): After intoxicated Ansar, including Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas, boasted and exchanged insulting verse, an Ansari split Saʿd's head with a camel jaw; Umar prayed for decisive clarification, and the final prohibition followed, to which he assented. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 RAZI-FULL (حمزة والكسائي): Hamza and al-Kisaʾi read kathīr, many, arguing that wine and gambling bring numerous sins, the Prophet cursed ten connected to wine, and harms contrast with many benefits. | mentions 5:91 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): At a later banquet hosted by Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, a drunken prayer prompted the prohibition on approaching prayer intoxicated. | mentions 4, :, 4, 3 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The account next describes Utban inviting Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas and others; drunken boasting led Saʿd to insult the Anṣār, and an Anṣārī wounded him with a camel jaw. BURSEVI (author): Wine was prohibited in the third year after the Hijra, a few days after the Battle of the Trench. BURSEVI (القفال): Al-Qaffāl explains the staged ban as gentle instruction: people were accustomed to wine and benefited from it, so an immediate prohibition would have burdened them; after the final ruling, it was poured out. BURSEVI (ابن عمر): Ibn ʿUmar says that when the final ban came, some Companions broke their wine jars and others washed them with water and clay; rain later revealed wine's color and smell in Medina's streets for a time. BURSEVI (المفسرون): At a gathering hosted by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAwf, a drunken reciter omitted the negation in Sūrat al-Kāfirūn; the prayer-time prohibition followed. | mentions 4:43, 109:1 BURSEVI (المفسرون): At ʿItbān ibn Mālik's feast, Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ recited a poem insulting the Anṣār and praising his clan; a guest struck and wounded Saʿd with a camel's jawbone, after which Saʿd complained to the Messenger. BURSEVI (عمر): After Saʿd's injury, ʿUmar prayed for a decisive clarification; the final prohibition verses were then revealed and he answered that they had desisted. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 ALUSI-FULL (بعض الروايات): At a later feast hosted by ʿUtban, Saʿd’s boasting poem insulted the Anṣār; a man struck and wounded him, after which Saʿd appealed to the Prophet and the final prohibition was revealed days after al-Aḥzāb; ʿUmar declared they had stopped. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 ALUSI-FULL (علي): ʿAlī says he would not pray from a minaret built over a well into which wine had fallen, nor let his animal graze where wine had fallen into the sea. ALUSI-FULL (إبن عمر): Ibn ʿUmar says that if he dipped his finger into wine, it would not follow him, an image of complete avoidance. ELMALILI (Hazret-i Ali): Ali is reported to say he would neither pray from a minaret built over a well touched by a drop of wine nor graze animals where a wine-tainted sea had dried. ELMALILI (Abdullah b. Ömer): Ibn Umar is reported to say he would cut off a finger that had been dipped in wine."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q26", "question": "Who asked what to spend, and for what purpose?", "turns_on": "Reports name ʿAmr, Muʿādh and Thaʿlaba, or the Companions generally, and differ on the intended expenditure.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q26/p1", "position": "Other reported circumstances or purposes are given.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): If ماذا is treated as ما alone, العفو is accusative as the object of ينفقون: the question is what they spend, and the answer is that they spend surplus. AKHFASH (author): If ذا is the relative الذي, العفو is nominative as the predicate: what they spend is surplus; compare the two analyses of ماذا in 16:24 and 16:30. | mentions 16:24, 16:30 TAB-FULL (author): With al-ʿafw accusative, mādhā is one word and the object of yanfiqūn; al-ʿafw is also accusative in the answer, meaning “what do they spend?—al-ʿafw.” TAB-FULL (author): With al-ʿafw nominative, mā is linked to dhā, and the reply means “what do they spend?—that which they spend is al-ʿafw.” ZAJJAJ (author): If mā is a noun and dhā a predicate meaning alladhī, al-ʿafw is nominative as the answer to what they spend. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): With rafʿ, mā and dhā are separate: dhā is relative, and al-ʿafw is the predicate answering what they should spend. THALABI (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The morning after Hamza's drunken attack, he apologized; the Prophet said he had asked God, who had forgiven him. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): With mā plus relative dhā, the question means what thing do they spend, and al-ʿafw is the nominative answer. JISHUMI (أبو عمرو): Abu ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw with nominative case, meaning what they spend is the surplus; the others read it accusatively, meaning tell them to spend the surplus. BAGHAWI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw in the nominative, meaning what they spend is the surplus; the other readers use the accusative, meaning spend the surplus. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is what one can give without exhausting oneself or one’s assets: spend what remains after needs, without making oneself dependent; the term derives from abundance. TABRISI (author): The question means, “What thing should they spend?” TABRISI (author): For nominative العفو, ذا means الذي, so the question means what is it that they spend; العفو answers as the predicate of an omitted subject. TABRISI (author): For accusative العفو, ما ذا
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
