<<chunk 34, part 1 of 0..5>>
s meal led to 4:43, and later a drunken dispute at Saʿd ibn Abī Waqqāṣ’s meal led to 5:90–91 and prohibition. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says the verse initially disparaged wine and gambling without banning them; 4:43 then prohibited drunkenness around prayer, and after al-Aḥzāb 5:90 prohibited wine in every amount, whether intoxicating or not. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says the verse censured wine and gambling for their greater sin without yet forbidding them; Muslims then drank wine lawfully for its benefits. FARISI-HUJJA (سعيد عن قتادة): Qatāda says the verse condemned wine without prohibiting it while it was lawful; the prayer and later al-Māʾida verses then prohibited every amount. | mentions 4:43 FARISI-HUJJA (بعض نقلة الآثار): Transmitters report that this verse descended without prohibiting wine; reports differ on whether prohibition came here or in al-Māʾida. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): This verse is not the prohibition of wine and gambling; the prohibiting verse is in al-Maʾida. | mentions 5:90 WAHIDI-BASIT (قتادة): Qatada says the verse condemned wine and gambling without prohibiting them, since they were still lawful then. WAHIDI-BASIT (قوم من أهل النظر): Some rationalists argue wine was prohibited here because another verse prohibits sin generally and this verse calls wine and gambling sinful. | mentions 7:33 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): This verse did not itself prohibit wine and gambling; it preceded their prohibition in Sūrat al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 JISHUMI (author): Another view holds that benefit and sin coexist in one state, while prohibition is a separate matter, as water benefits a fasting person if he drinks it. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Another explanation says the sin exceeded the benefit even before prohibition because of the enmity and hatred they caused. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin found in wine is what is forbidden, not wine itself as that argument requires. | mentions 7:33 IBNATIYYA-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the verse censured wine but did not prohibit it. TABRISI (الحسن): Al-Hasan infers prohibition because harm exceeds benefit and because the verse calls it sin, which another verse forbids; its description as a major sin independently supports prohibition. | mentions 7:33 TABRISI (قتادة): Qatada says this verse does not establish prohibition; al-Maʾida 5:90 does. | mentions 5:90 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن جبير): Another reading compares sin and benefit before prohibition: the sins arising from their causes already outweighed their benefits. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Another account says wine was permitted by the earlier divine law and Muslims remained under that rule until prohibition. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي عن أشياخه، سعيد بن جبير، مجاهد، قتادة، مقاتل): One position says the verse censures wine without prohibiting it, so this verse was abrogated. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (جماعة من العلماء): Another position finds a prohibition here because sin is forbidden by 7:33; al-Zajjāj transmits this view and Qāḍī Abū Yaʿlā prefers it. | mentions 7:33 RAZI-FULL (author): Razi answers the blessing argument: an indefinite mention of sugar and good provision does not prove that the disputed nabidh is meant; the earlier verse was superseded or qualified by the later prohibitions. | mentions 16:67 RAZI-FULL (منهم من قال): Some argue that the verse cannot prohibit wine because it explicitly recognizes benefits in it, and prohibited things cannot be beneficial. RAZI-FULL (منهم من قال): Some object that if this verse already prohibited wine, the later prayer restriction and al-Maida prohibition would have been unnecessary. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects that inference: the sin within wine is forbidden, not wine itself as the argument would require. | mentions 7:33 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Some say the verse prohibits wine by calling it sin, and others equate wine with sin using a poet's line; al-Qurṭubī rejects both because it says wine contains sin, not that wine itself is sin. | mentions 7:33 QURTUBI-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says this verse censures wine but its prohibition is established by another verse in Sūrat al-Māʾida; most exegetes hold this view. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مكي): Makkī takes the sequence reported by Ibn Jubayr to show that this verse was abrogated by the later prohibition in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says this verse disparaged wine without yet prohibiting it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another explanation is that reflection concerns God’s commands and prohibitions, leading to obedience in this life and reward in the next. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Those benefits do not outweigh the greater harm to intellect and religion; the verse prepares for wine’s categorical prohibition by implication, before 5:90–91 states it explicitly. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 BIQAI-FULL (author): The sin includes lying, abuse, loss of reason, and taking another's property; declaring the acts sinful establishes their prohibition and identifies them as major sins. ALUSI-FULL (author): Cooking cannot erase an already established prohibition; however, a cooked drink is not subject to the fixed penalty until it intoxicates, since that penalty for a small amount applies specifically to raw wine. ALUSI-FULL (الأوزاعي وأكثر المعتزلة): Al-Awzāʿī and most Muʿtazilites permit this drink because it is pleasant and not wine; the author responds that it is intoxicating and attracts sinners, so it should be prohibited to prevent corruption. ALUSI-FULL (author): The disagreement is substantial: permitting grape wine is disbelief by consensus, while permitting other intoxicants is not, since their designation as wine is disputed and their prohibition is inferential. ALUSI-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the verse is not explicit proof of prohibition: “sin” can mean harm, and a preponderance of harm alone establishes preference, not a ban; Companions drank until the al-Māʾida prohibition. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The prohibition unfolded in stages: an early Meccan notice of fruit benefits, then a ban on praying while intoxicated, this comparison of harms and benefits, and finally categorical prohibition. | mentions 16:67, 4:43, 5:90 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The extant Torah and Gospels do not appear to prohibit wine. Against — JISHUMI (author): Al-Qadi rejects that timing account: a great sin must be forbidden, this verse is more emphatic than a simple prohibition, and any Companion hesitation could await a stronger ruling. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 Against — TABATABAI (بعض المفسرين): Some exegetes argue that this verse is not explicit in prohibition: sin means harm, and an item with both harm and benefit is not thereby forbidden; they say Companions differed, some abstaining and others continuing while avoiding harm, until al-Māʾida’s explicit ban. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 Against — TABATABAI (author): Even if 2:219 alone were insufficient to establish prohibition, its explicit naming of sin follows 7:33’s earlier general prohibition; wine is a complete instance of great sin. | mentions 7:33, 4:48"}, {"id": "2:219/q24/p3", "position": "It implies prohibition or begins a gradual ban, while later verses make it explicit.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (ومن الناس من قال): An alternative chronology says this verse prohibited wine first, the prayer verse then prohibited drinking at prayer time (implicitly stopping drinking since an intoxicated person cannot pray), and al-Maida made the ban emphatic. | mentions 4:43, 5:90, 5:91 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffāl gives a four-stage sequence for wine: the palm-and-grape verse, this verse, the prayer restriction, then final prohibition; gradualism eased a people accustomed to drinking. | mentions 16:67, 4:43, 5:90 ELMALILI (author): This began the prohibition, but its wording still left a possibility of permissibility; some quit immediately while others continued."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q25", "question": "What sequence of revelations and incidents led to the wine ban?", "turns_on": "Reports differ on the order of 2:219 and 4:43 and on the people and incidents leading to the final ban.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q25/p1", "position": "The common sequence moves from 16:67 to 2:219, then 4:43 after a drunken prayer, then 5:90–91 after a drunken quarrel.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Mujahid calls this the first occasion on which wine was censured. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid calls this the first criticism directed at wine. TAB-FULL (author): The sin in gambling is distraction from remembering God and prayer, and the enmity and hatred that arise between gamblers. | mentions 5:91 TAB-FULL (عكرمة والحسن): ʿIkrima and al-Ḥasan say the wine passages in 2:219 and 4:43 were superseded by the passage in 5:90. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī counts four wine passages: 2:219, the passage at 16:67 after which people drank, and the final prohibition in 5:90–91. | mentions 16:67, 5:90, 5:91 TAB-FULL (قتادة ومجاهد): Qatada and a transmitter from Mujahid say that after this verse some people drank wine and others abstained until its prohibition in Sūrat al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid again describes this as the first criticism directed at wine. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ transmits that the Prophet called each successive revelation a sign that God was advancing the prohibition of wine, until it became forbidden. | mentions 4:43, 5:90 TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the passage was superseded by three verses in al-Māʾida and discusses the Prophet’s wine punishment: he treated it as a hadd by his judgment, not a fixed, named hadd. | mentions 5:90 ZAJJAJ (قوم): Some say this verse only discouraged wine and gambling, with their prohibition made explicit later in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the statement about sin and benefits in this verse was abrogated by the final prohibition in 5:90. 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
