<<chunk 35, part 2 of 0..5>>
e people lack basic necessities, those who do not help meet those needs remain accountable for their surplus wealth. | mentions 51:19 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): God may command or forbid without giving a reason and is not answerable for His acts; human beings, by contrast, are responsible. STUDYQURAN (author): The proper extent of charitable giving is also addressed in 17:29. | mentions 17:29"}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p2", "position": "Give what is readily available or affordable without strain.", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): Al-ʿafw is what one can afford, and also moderation or what is readily clear for one; take what is easy and available to you. IBNABIHATIM (طاوس عن مجاهد): A report through Mujahid from Tawus defines al-afw as the easy or readily available portion of everything. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو عبيدة): Abū ʿUbayda defines it as affordable capacity or moderation and connects it to what is clear or available. THALABI (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak defines al-afw as what one can afford. THALABI (طاوس وعطاء الخراساني): Tawus and Ata al-Khurasani transmit from Bishr that al-afw is the easy or available amount of each thing. BAGHAWI-FULL (طاووس): Ṭāwūs says al-ʿafw is what is easy; the same word can mean what is easy or readily available in a person’s character, as in 7:199. | mentions 7:199 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): العفو is the opposite of strenuous effort: spend what does not exhaust one's means; the poem خذي العفو مني uses it for what is easy, and it can also mean soft, level land. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (أهل التفسير): ʿAfw can mean the surplus wealth available after one’s needs. | mentions 7:199 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة): Al-ʿafw means what is readily available, obtained easily without coercion or hardship. RAZI-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffāl defines al-ʿafw as what is easy and available beyond one's sufficiency; Rāzī relates surplus to ease and removal of hardship. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw means what is easy and readily available, what is surplus without hardship; spend what remains after needs without harming yourself and becoming dependent. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A poet's line uses al-ʿafw for leniency or what is readily given, supporting this sense of the word. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A cited poem uses al-ʿafw in the sense of an easy or generous amount offered to preserve affection. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is the opposite of exertion: spend what is readily available without exhausting yourself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan also defines the amount as one that does not exhaust the giver’s resources and leave him begging others. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (طاووس): Ṭāwūs understands al-ʿafw as an easy, modest amount that does not damage one’s wealth. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the instruction means not exhausting one's wealth and then having to ask people for help. DURR-FULL (طاوس): Tawus interprets al-afw as ease or what is readily available in every matter. BURSEVI (author): Al-ʿafw is the opposite of effort and hardship: spend what is easy, available, and surplus to one's own needs and the needs of dependents. ALUSI-FULL (author): ʿAfw is the opposite of exertion: what remains beyond need or does not burden the giver; smooth, easy-to-tread ground is also called ʿafw. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Spending surplus supports weak Muslims continuously and evenly without hardship, making this a wise social and economic principle. STUDYQURAN (author): Al-ʿafw means what is easy or done without difficulty, and in other contexts can mean pardon or forgiveness."}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p3", "position": "Another lexical or inward nuance of ʿafw is given.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (طاوس): Tawus interprets al-afw, the amount to spend, as maysir. TAB-FULL (author): The companions ask what portion of their wealth to give as charity; God answers that they should give al-ʿafw. TAB-FULL (author): Muhammad’s companions ask what wealth to give in charity, and God directs them to give al-ʿafw. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ says al-ʿafw is an amount that does not exhaust one’s wealth and force one to ask others. TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says al-ʿafw means not exhausting one’s wealth. TAB-FULL (author): In Arabic, al-ʿafw in wealth and other things means increase and abundance; al-Ṭabarī cites the phrase in 7:95 as an example. | mentions 7:95 FARISI-HUJJA (غيره): Another authority glosses al-ʿafw as wealth beyond one’s exertion. THALABI (author): The reported definitions are close in meaning; linguistically al-afw denotes increase and abundance, as in the verse about a people increasing and the prophetic instruction to grow beards. | mentions 7:95 THALABI (author): The poet's عافيات means abundant in fat; al-afw also describes what someone receives or gives easily, without compulsion. THALABI (الوالبي عن ابن عباس): Al-Walibi transmits Ibn Abbas's definition of al-afw as what is not conspicuous among one's assets. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): In the al-Walibi report, Ibn Abbas defines al-ʿafw as what is not conspicuous in one’s property. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Al-ʿafw means increase; the verse until they grew and a poem about fat camels illustrate abundance. | mentions 7:95 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Thus points to the explanation of spending: just as He explained al-ʿafw, God clarifies signs so people reflect and know the afterlife is superior. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): When the Prophet urged them to give charity, people asked what they should spend, and the answer was al-ʿafw. TABRISI (author): Al-ʿafw can also mean what is left or relinquished; the Prophet’s waived horse alms illustrate property one can dispense with. | mentions 2:178 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): ʿAfw can mean pardon, as in God’s forgiving a servant. RAZI-FULL (author): The spending question had already been answered by identifying the recipient; it is repeated here to answer how much to give. Observing the call to generosity, people asked whether they must give everything or only part, and God accepts al-ʿafw. QURTUBI-FULL (author): After 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked how much to spend, and the answer about al-ʿafw addressed that amount. | mentions 2:215 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is also explained as abundance, from the sense “they became numerous”; an anonymous poetic line is cited for this usage. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another lexical sense is purity or clarity: the idiom أتاك عفوا means something came to you pure and unclouded, supported by a poetic line. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī defines al-ʿafw as the opposite of exertion: spend what does not require exhausting effort or capacity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الماتريدي): Al-Māturīdī defines al-ʿafw as the amount left over from subsistence. DURR-FULL (الحسن): Hasan says giving al-afw means not spending oneself into poverty and then having to ask people for help. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says no fixed amount was prescribed here; 7:199 then commanded taking al-afw, before named dues were revealed. | mentions 7:199 DURR-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says the instruction to give al-afw was later abrogated by zakat. BURSEVI (author): The charity question continues the topic of what to spend raised by the earlier verse; when 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked what he should spend, prompting the instruction al-ʿafw. | mentions 2:215 BURSEVI (author): Al-ʿafw also hints that a donor's gift should leave no trace in the heart, meaning it should be given freely and cheerfully; the root sense is erasure. ALUSI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan explains ʿafw as an amount that does not strain the giver. ELMALILI (author): In the verse's translation, al-ʿafw is rendered as what does not burden or strain the giver. TABATABAI (الراغب): Al-Rāghib derives ʿafw from aiming at something to take it, then notes its later senses of forgiveness, effacing traces, and moderation in spending; moderation is intended here. TABATABAI (الباقر والصادق عليهما السلام): Imams al-Baqir and al-Sadiq explain al-afw as enough for subsistence. TABATABAI (أبو بصير): A report from Abu Basir glosses al-afw as moderation or a reasonable amount. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān objects to Ibn ʿAṭiyya’s paraphrase “al-ʿafw is your spending,” since the question asks what is spent, not the act of spending; the mixed case combinations are permissible, not weak."}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p4", "position": "It denotes the obligatory alms or zakāt.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets al-afw as the obligatory alms. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid is also reported as identifying al-ʿafw with obligatory charity; Abū ʿĀṣim is uncertain in the transmission from Qays. ZAJJAJ (author): People were commanded to give away surplus until alms tax was prescribed; consensus holds zakat rules specify dues on the kinds of property. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد عن قيس المكي): A report through Qays al-Makki says Mujahid defined al-afw as the obligatory charity. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): A second view from Mujahid takes al-afw as the obligatory charity. JISHUMI (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets al-ʿafw as the obligatory alms. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قيس بن سعد): Qays b. Saʿd interprets “the surplus” to be the obligatory alms tax. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets al-ʿafw as the obligatory charity. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم): Abū Muslim says al-ʿafw may mean obligatory alms: the verse states the obligation generally while its details are given in the Sunna. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the required pre-zakāt surplus was what remained above one thousand dirhams, or its equivalent in gold. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other thresholds proposed are the surplus beyond a third, or beyond a year’s agricultural subsistence, a month’s for desert folk, or a day’s for laborers; hardship led to zakāt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid identifies al-ʿafw with obligatory charity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الراغب): Al-Rāghib says al-ʿafw covers both obligatory and voluntary giving and means surplus beyond comfortable means. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī defines al-ʿafw as what a person freely gives without strain; the command enco
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
