<<chunk 35, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q27", "question": "What does ٱلْعَفْوَ mean as the amount to spend?", "turns_on": "The word is explained through surplus, ease, moderation, quality, obligatory alms, or a freely offered amount.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q27/p1", "position": "Give the surplus remaining after one’s own and dependents’ necessary expenses.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): العفو is the surplus wealth one spends; al-Farrāʾ says the zakāt obligation later abrogated this ruling. ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): Qatada glosses al-ʿafw as surplus wealth. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): The question asks what they should give in charity. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): Al-ʿafw is the surplus beyond one's own and dependents' sustenance; it can also mean what comes easily, without compulsion or hardship. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas glosses al-ʿafw as what remains after one’s household support. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says al-ʿafw means surplus. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ also glosses al-ʿafw as surplus. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī likewise glosses al-ʿafw as surplus. TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan glosses al-ʿafw as surplus wealth. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says people should give what remains from that day’s earnings after providing for their families, without leaving them hungry. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers the surplus remaining after a person’s own, family, and necessary expenses; this is what the Prophet permitted as charity. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid defines al-ʿafw as charity given while one remains comfortably provided for. TAB-FULL (أبو هريرة): A man with one dinar is told to spend it on himself, then to provide for his family and child; with another remaining, he may decide what to do. TAB-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): The Prophet instructs a poor person to begin with himself, then dependents, and then charity to others if anything remains. TAB-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): A man offers the Prophet a gold egg that is all he owns; the Prophet rejects this all-in charity and says charity is from sufficiency. TAB-FULL (عبد الله): The Prophet says to give from surplus, begin with those one supports, and that a person is not blamed for keeping sufficient means. TAB-FULL (author): These reports show that the Prophet permitted charity from surplus after need; al-Ṭabarī identifies that surplus as al-ʿafw. TAB-FULL (author): The poem’s description of fat-rich animals illustrates ʿāfiyāt as abundant in fat, supporting the sense of plenty. TAB-FULL (author): The idiom “take what is left freely for you” means take what remains in excess after the other person’s effort; this supports al-ʿafw as surplus. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects equating al-ʿafw with obligatory zakāt: after neglect, even a person whose remaining property is only the zakāt due must pay it, which is exertion rather than surplus. TAB-FULL (author): He also rejects the view that al-ʿafw means whatever amount the owner gives, because that could include the whole wealth and so be exertion, not surplus. TAB-FULL (النبي): When Abū Lubābah offers to give away his wealth in repentance, the Prophet says a third is enough; a similar report is transmitted about Kaʿb ibn Mālik. Al-Ṭabarī uses this against defining al-ʿafw as wealth whose surplus is not apparent. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says no fixed amount was prescribed at first; 7:199 followed, and named obligations were revealed afterward. | mentions 7:199 TAB-FULL (author): This etiquette governs voluntary alms, gifts, and grants: spend first on oneself, family, and children, then direct remaining surplus to pleasing purposes. ZAJJAJ (author): Al-ʿafw means surplus or abundance; ʿafā al-qawm describes a people who became numerous. ZAJJAJ (author): Exegetical reports describe earners keeping enough income and owners of gold and silver keeping a year's provision, then donating the remainder. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس، عبد الله بن عمر، مجاهد، عطاء، الحسن، عكرمة، محمد بن كعب، قتادة، القاسم، سالم، سعيد بن جبير، عطاء الخراساني، الربيع بن أنس): Ibn Abbas explains al-afw as what remains after providing for one's family; many listed authorities are reported similarly. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says al-afw is surplus wealth and that this instruction came before charity was prescribed. IBNABIHATIM (السدي، عطاء الخراساني، أبو محمد): Al-Suddi interprets al-afw as surplus wealth and says the command was abrogated by zakat; Ata al-Khurasani is reported similarly. NAHHAS (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan takes the instruction to mean: spend the surplus. NAHHAS (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās explains al-ʿafw as the surplus. FARISI-HUJJA (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās defines al-ʿafw as what remains beyond the family’s needs. FARISI-HUJJA (عطاء وقتادة والسدي): ʿAṭāʾ, Qatāda, and al-Suddī define al-ʿafw as surplus. FARISI-HUJJA (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says it is the non-straining good surplus of one’s wealth, excluding the principal. THALABI (عبد الله بن عمرو ومحمد بن كعب وقتادة وعطاء والسدي وابن أبي ليلى): They define al-afw as money left over after providing for one's dependents; this is also narrated from Ibn Abbas through Miqsam. THALABI (أبو هريرة): A man is told by the Prophet to spend first on himself, then family, children, parents, and relatives; after that he decides what to do with any remainder. THALABI (عامر بن عبد الله): A man offers the Prophet his only possession, a gold egg; the Prophet finally takes and throws it, teaching that charity should come from sufficiency and one should begin with dependents. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan says one should not exhaust one's wealth in spending and then have to beg people. THALABI (مجاهد): Mujahid defines it as charity that purifies the wealthy. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): One interpretation of al-afw is what remains after providing for one's family. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): One view from Mujahid takes the spending as charity given from a position of sufficiency. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says the command concerning al-afw remains in force. WAHIDI-BASIT (عمرو بن الجموح): After the answer about parents and kin, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamuh asked how much to spend, prompting revelation of say, the surplus. | mentions 2:215 WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas, al-Suddi, Qatada, and ʿAta say al-ʿafw is wealth left after providing for dependents. WAHIDI-BASIT (مجاهد): Mujahid says al-ʿafw is charity given from sufficiency. WAHIDI-BASIT (أهل التفسير): Exegetes say people were told to give surplus, keeping a year’s expenses; obligatory zakat later abrogated this verse and earlier charity commands. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Al-ʿafw is the money left over after providing for one’s dependents. DAMGHANI (author): ʿAfw means surplus wealth, what remains beyond one’s needs. | mentions 7:199 JISHUMI (ابن عباس وقتادة وعطاء والسدي): Ibn ʿAbbas, Qatada, ʿAtaʾ, and al-Suddi gloss al-ʿafw as surplus beyond one's own and family's needs, given from comfortable means. BAGHAWI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abū Hurayra reports a man with four dinars was told to spend them in order on himself, his child, his family, and his servant; with anything left, he could decide for himself. BAGHAWI-FULL (قتادة وعطاء والسدي): Qatāda, ʿAṭāʾ, and al-Suddī define al-ʿafw as what exceeds one’s needs; the Companions kept necessary expenses and donated the surplus under this rule, later abrogated by the zakat verse. BAGHAWI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid says charity should be given from one’s means without leaving oneself dependent on other people. BAGHAWI-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): Abū Hurayra reports the Prophet saying that the best charity is given from abundance, the upper hand is better than the lower, and one should begin with dependants. KASHSHAF-FULL (النبي): The Prophet rejected a man's offer of a golden egg as charity several times, then threw it back and said charity should come from surplus, not leave the donor begging; no grading is stated. IBNATIYYA-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A Prophetic report directs a person with surplus to spend first on self, then dependents, then charity if anything remains; no grading is stated. IBNATIYYA-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): Two Prophetic reports commend charity that leaves the giver financially secure, described as giving from sufficiency; Ibn ʿAṭiyya gives no grading. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعضهم): Some say the command to spend the surplus was abrogated by the later zakat obligation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is what one can give without exhausting oneself or one’s assets: spend what remains after needs, without making oneself dependent; the term derives from abundance. TABRISI (author): Al-ʿafw means increase or surplus, as in the description of a people increasing in number. TABRISI (author): Al-ʿafw can denote excess; the cited description of sheep as fat-rich supports the sense of surplus. TABRISI (أبو جعفر الباقر): Abu Jaʿfar al-Baqir says al-ʿafw is what remains after a year’s provisions; he says the zakat verse abrogated this, as al-Suddi also held. TABRISI (ابن عباس وقتادة): Ibn Abbas and Qatada interpret al-ʿafw as what remains beyond family needs and sufficiency. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): ʿAfw can mean disappearance of a trace, as when dust covers and hides a dwelling’s remains. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (ابن فارس): Ibn Fāris says ʿafw is lawful, good wealth; ʿafāt are petitioners, and ʿafw of wealth is what remains beyond expenses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Others deny abrogation; the author distinguishes the rulings by the interpretation: a required surplus or pre-zakat charity was abrogated, while zakat itself or recommended charity remains operative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة): Here spending means charitable giving and a donation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-ʿafw can mean abundance or surplus; its root usage includes something that has grown, and it can mean what comes without effort. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مقسم عن ابن عباس): One interpretation is what remains after a person and their dependents have what they need. RAZI-FULL (author): Another obligatory-spending view dates the command before the alms verse: people kept a year's
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
