<<chunk 35, part 3 of 0..5>>
urages giving the surplus but does not make that level obligatory, preserving ease for this community. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī sorts spending into obligatory alms, dispensable surplus that should not be hoarded, and contested property whose donation requires striving and becomes a trade for the afterlife. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses al-afw as an amount not conspicuous in one's property and says this preceded obligatory alms. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid is reported as taking al-afw here to mean obligatory charity. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): This supports voluntary spending: consensus and the wider law require obligatory maintenance and zakat, which may be drawn from surplus wealth. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Broadening aid beyond gambling proceeds and zakat to surplus goods, food, and clothing promotes social justice and makes unmet basic needs rare. Against — TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects equating al-ʿafw with obligatory zakāt: after neglect, even a person whose remaining property is only the zakāt due must pay it, which is exertion rather than surplus."}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p5", "position": "Give the good, pure, finest part of one’s wealth.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ interprets al-ʿafw as the good, best, and purest part of one’s wealth. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says al-ʿafw is the surplus, the best of one’s wealth. TAB-FULL (author): The Prophet’s statement that the best charity is given from sufficiency confirms al-Ṭabarī’s surplus interpretation. IBNABIHATIM (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabi explains al-afw as the good portion of one's wealth, its best and finest part. THALABI (الربيع): Al-Rabi defines al-afw as good, meaning that one should spend the best of one's property. JISHUMI (الربيع): Al-Rabiʿ interprets al-ʿafw as what is wholesome or good. TABRISI (author): A fourth, unattributed interpretation takes al-ʿafw to mean the finest and best property. RAZI-FULL (النبي): The Prophet calls the best charity what leaves its giver self-sufficient, and says a person with only enough for bare needs is not blameworthy. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid defines the giving as charity from a position of financial sufficiency, supported by the Prophet's saying that the best charity is what one gives when solvent. QURTUBI-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet is quoted in two formulations: the best charity is given from financial sufficiency. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ glosses al-ʿafw as the good, choice, or best portion. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabiʿ also glosses al-afw as one's best and finest property; Ibn Kathir says the definitions return to the idea of surplus. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A hadith says the best charity leaves the giver sufficiently provided for, the upper hand is better, and one should begin with dependents, including family, servants, and children. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A second report says the best charity preserves sufficiency, praises the giving hand, and says to start with dependents; examples include one's wife, servant, and child. ALUSI-FULL (أبو هريرة): The Prophet says the best charity is given from sufficiency and that one should begin with those one supports; this is reported by al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Nasāʾī. ALUSI-FULL (أبو هريرة): Ibn Khuzayma’s version says the best charity leaves sufficiency, the upper hand is better, and one should begin with dependents; wife, slave, and child each plead for support. IBNASHUR-FULL (النبي ﷺ): A prophetic report calls the best charity that given from sufficiency and says to begin with those one supports. TABATABAI (author): The intended ʿafw here is the moderate or surplus amount to spend; he adds “God knows best.”"}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p6", "position": "Give a moderate amount between extravagance and stinginess.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan also defines al-ʿafw as a middle level of spending: do not exhaust your wealth in giving it away. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ also explains al-ʿafw as spending without extravagance or miserliness in what is right. TAB-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is measured moderation: the amount the Prophet set according to one’s wealth and capacity, between extravagance and miserliness, as urged in 25:67 and 17:29. | mentions 25:67, 17:29 TAB-FULL (author): The proper amount is balance between extravagance and stinginess, as described in the Qur’an’s account of moderate spending. | mentions 25:67 THALABI (عمرو بن دينار وعطاء): Amr ibn Dinar and Ata define it as moderate spending, neither extravagant nor miserly. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن): Hasan takes al-afw as the moderate level of spending, neither extravagance nor parsimony. JISHUMI (الحسن وعطاء): Al-Hasan and ʿAtaʾ interpret al-ʿafw as a moderate amount, avoiding both extravagance and stinginess. BAGHAWI-FULL (عمرو بن دينار): ʿAmr ibn Dīnār interprets al-ʿafw as a moderate amount, without extravagance or stinginess, linking it to 25:67. | mentions 25:67 TABRISI (الحسن وعطاء): Al-Hasan and ʿAtaʾ take al-ʿafw as the moderate amount, avoiding extravagance and stinginess; this is also transmitted from Abu Abd Allah. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن، عطاء، سعيد بن جبير): A third interpretation is a moderate amount between extravagance and stinginess. RAZI-FULL (الحكماء): The sages place virtue between excess and deficiency: lavish giving is waste, extreme parsimony is miserliness, and balance is the mean intended here. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan defines al-ʿafw as the moderate amount between extravagance and falling short. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Ibn Jubayr identifies three uses of al-afw: pardoning sin, moderate spending here, and graciousness between people in 2:237. | mentions 2:237 TABATABAI (الصادق عليه السلام): Imam al-Sadiq glosses al-afw as the middle amount. TABATABAI (الصادق عليه السلام): Imam al-Sadiq relates the spending verse to the description of those who spend neither extravagantly nor stingily, saying this is the moderate course. | mentions 25:67 STUDYQURAN (Commentators): Charitable giving should avoid both miserliness and wastefulness and should not impoverish the giver."}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p7", "position": "It is whatever amount people freely offer, little or much.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): The command to accept what people freely volunteer means not to press them for more than they offer. | mentions 7:199 TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says to accept whatever people bring, whether little or much. THALABI (العوفي عن ابن عباس): Al-Awfi transmits Ibn Abbas's view that one should accept whatever people offer, whether little or much. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عطية عن ابن عباس): Another interpretation is whatever amount people willingly give, whether little or much. Against — TAB-FULL (author): He also rejects the view that al-ʿafw means whatever amount the owner gives, because that could include the whole wealth and so be exertion, not surplus."}, {"id": "2:219/q27/p8", "position": "It is a small amount from each thing or an amount inconspicuous in one’s property.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): A second gloss from Ibn ʿAbbas is whatever does not show noticeably in one’s property. TAB-FULL (طاوس): Ṭāwūs says al-ʿafw is a small amount from each thing. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): A further report from Ibn Abbas takes al-afw as whatever people can provide, little or much. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (طائفة من المفسرين): A fifth interpretation is property whose amount is not apparent, drawing on the phrase for a trace that has vanished. IBNKATHIR-FULL (طاوس): Tawus defines al-afw as a small amount of everything; Ibn Kathir includes this under the general sense of surplus."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q28", "question": "How is ٱلْعَفْوَ read and parsed in the answer?", "turns_on": "The case follows different analyses of mādhā and an implied verb or subject; alternative pairings are disputed.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q28/p1", "position": "Both case endings and alternative parses of mādhā are grammatically possible.", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): Al-ʿafw is what one can afford, and also moderation or what is readily clear for one; take what is easy and available to you. AKHFASH (author): The alternative case can also be licensed by meaning: a nominative answer can mean 'what I did was good,' while an accusative answer can mean 'I did good.' AKHFASH (author): In the poem دعي ماذا علمت, ما and ذا together mean ما alone; taking ذا as الذي would make دعي ما الذي علمت ungrammatical. TAB-FULL (قراء الحجاز، قراء الحرمين، عظم قراء الكوفيين، بعض قراء البصريين): Most Hijazi, Ḥaramayn, and Kufan readers pronounce al-ʿafw accusative; some Basrans read it nominative. Both readings are sound, but al-Ṭabarī prefers accusative because it is more widely read and renowned. TAB-FULL (author): With al-ʿafw accusative, mādhā is one word and the object of yanfiqūn; al-ʿafw is also accusative in the answer, meaning “what do they spend?—al-ʿafw.” TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī says the alternative parses are also valid Arabic: accusative al-ʿafw with mādhā as two words, or nominative al-ʿafw with mādhā as one. ZAJJAJ (author): Al-ʿafw may also be nominative with compound mā-dhā, understood as the predicate in, Say: it is the surplus. ZAJJAJ (author): Both accusative and nominative are possible for al-ʿafw when mā-dhā is treated as one noun and al-ʿafw is referred back to it. IBNABIHATIM (طاوس عن مجاهد): A report through Mujahid from Tawus defines al-afw as the easy or readily available portion of everything. NAHHAS (author): If dhā means “that which,” nominative is preferred but accusative is allowed; if mādhā is one word, accusative is preferred but nominative is allowed. Both occur in the question ماذا تعلمت أنحوا أم شعرا. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): Mā and dhā combine because both are general and ambiguous, covering rational and non-rational things; man is restricted to rational beings, so man and dhā do not combine. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Abū ʿAmr alone reads al-ʿafw nominative; others read it accusative, also reporte
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
