<<chunk 35, part 4 of 0..5>>
d from Ibn ʿĀmir. A Meccan transmission from Ibn Kathīr has nominative, though Meccans now read accusative. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Mādhā can be one compound interrogative noun; retaining the alif in ʿammā dhā tasʾalu shows mā is not word-final, unlike ʿamma and fīma. | mentions 78:1, 79:43 FARISI-HUJJA (author): Alternatively, dhā can mean ‘that which’; a cited poem uses mādhā in that sense. FARISI-HUJJA (author): In the poet’s question about the women, mādhā functions like mā alone; parsing dhā as a relative pronoun is unnatural. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو إسحاق): Abu Ishaq allows accusative al-ʿafw as the object of yanfiqūn and also allows nominative if mā-dhā is one word. BAGHAWI-FULL (طاووس): Ṭāwūs says al-ʿafw is what is easy; the same word can mean what is easy or readily available in a person’s character, as in 7:199. | mentions 7:199 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The word العفو is read in both the nominative and accusative. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If mā is a subject and dhā its relative predicate, al-ʿafw is nominative; if mādhā is one object of “spend,” al-ʿafw is accusative after an implied verb. The mixed case pairings are possible but weak. TABRISI (author): The question about what God sent down is cited as a parallel for reading ذا as a relative pronoun. | mentions 16:24 TABRISI (author): Sībawayh allows ذا to mean الذي only in this construction; the Kufans permit it elsewhere and cite poetry and Moses' question, but Tabrisi rejects their evidence because the quoted phrases may be circumstantial expressions. TABRISI (author): The Kufan evidence from Moses' question does not establish a relative-clause use, since بيمينك may be a circumstantial phrase. | mentions 20:17 TABRISI (author): The single-expression analysis is illustrated by the idiom عما ذا تسأل and a poem asking ماذا بال نسوتكم, meaning ما بال نسوتكم. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن قتيبة): Al-ʿafw means what is readily available, obtained easily without coercion or hardship. RAZI-FULL (author): The spending question had already been answered by identifying the recipient; it is repeated here to answer how much to give. Observing the call to generosity, people asked whether they must give everything or only part, and God accepts al-ʿafw. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Most reciters read al-ʿafw in the accusative; Abū ʿAmr alone reads nominative, reports differ about Ibn Kathīr, and al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, and Ibn Abī Isḥāq also read nominative. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw means what is easy and readily available, what is surplus without hardship; spend what remains after needs without harming yourself and becoming dependent. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A poet's line uses al-ʿafw for leniency or what is readily given, supporting this sense of the word. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is the opposite of exertion: spend what is readily available without exhausting yourself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān objects to Ibn ʿAṭiyya’s paraphrase “al-ʿafw is your spending,” since the question asks what is spent, not the act of spending; the mixed case combinations are permissible, not weak. SAMIN-DURR (مجاهد): Al-Ṭabarī attributes to Mujāhid a derivation from يسر لي كذا, meaning something became due to me; Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects it. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The word al-afw is read in both the accusative and nominative; Ibn Kathir regards both readings as sound, apt, and close in meaning. DURR-FULL (طاوس): Tawus interprets al-afw as ease or what is readily available in every matter."}, {"id": "2:219/q28/p2", "position": "Accusative al-ʿafwa answers an object question, often treating mādhā as one interrogative word.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): If ماذا is treated as ما alone, العفو is accusative as the object of ينفقون: the question is what they spend, and the answer is that they spend surplus. ZAJJAJ (author): Al-ʿafw may be accusative as the object of yunfiqun: spend the surplus, even when mā is a noun by itself. NAHHAS (author): The Ḥaramayn and Kufans read al-ʿafw accusative, while Abū ʿAmr, ʿĪsā ibn ʿUmar, and Ibn Abī Isḥāq read nominative; both are grammatical, but the verse’s interpretation favors accusative. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): With naṣb, mādhā is one interrogative word and al-ʿafw is the object of yanfiqūn. THALABI (أبو عبيد وأبو حاتم): Most readers use the accusative al-afwa, which Abu Ubayd and Abu Hatim prefer as the answer: spend the surplus. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Readers pronounce al-ʿafw accusative or nominative; with mā-dhā as one interrogative, it is object and the answer is accusative. JISHUMI (أبو عمرو): Abu ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw with nominative case, meaning what they spend is the surplus; the others read it accusatively, meaning tell them to spend the surplus. BAGHAWI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw in the nominative, meaning what they spend is the surplus; the other readers use the accusative, meaning spend the surplus. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور الناس وأبو عمرو): Most readers put al-ʿafw in the accusative; Abū ʿAmr alone raises it, and Ibn Kathīr’s reading is reported as differing. TABRISI (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr alone reads العفو in the nominative; the other readers use the accusative. TABRISI (author): For accusative العفو, ما ذا is one interrogative expression and ماذا ينفقون functions like ما ينفقون, asking what they spend; the answer is accusative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw in the nominative; the other reciters read it in the accusative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو علي): The accusative treats mādhā as accusative and al-ʿafw as its answer, as in answering “What did you spend?” with “a dirham.” RAZI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw with nominative wāw, parsing mā as a relative pronoun and the question as “what is it that they spend?”; others read it accusative as the answer “they spend the surplus.” QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس وغيره): Al-Naḥḥās and others prefer nominative if dhā means that which, and accusative if mādhā is one interrogative word; either form is acceptable, though the verse is interpreted accusatively. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Grammarians consider both case endings sound in ماذا تعلمت أنحوا أم شعرا, while the verse is interpreted with the accusative: spend the surplus. NASAFI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abu ʿAmr reads العفو in the accusative; then ماذا is one noun as the object and the answer means they spend the surplus. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Most readers vocalize العفو in the accusative as the object of an omitted ينفقون; this matches ماذا as an interrogative object asking what they spend. NASHR (أبو عمرو): Abu Amr's nominative العفو favors two words, interrogative ما and relative ذا, allowing a pause after either; other readers' accusative favors one compound word and a pause only after ذا. NASHR (أبو عمرو): Abu Amr reads العفو with nominative; the other readers use accusative. ITQAN (author): For the accusative reading, he prefers ماذا as a single interrogative form, yielding “they spend the surplus”; a verb question is answered by a verb phrase. ALUSI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads “mādhā yunfiqūn” with nominative inflection, parsing the question as subject and predicate; the others read the accusative, supplying a verb with “what” as its object to match the answer. IBNASHUR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority read al-afw accusative as object of an understood verb, treating dha after interrogative ma as canceled and ma as yunfiqun's fronted object. QIRAAT-ER (author): The nominative al-ʿafwu reading treats it as subject or predicate, while accusative al-ʿafwa is an object reading, restructuring the syntax."}, {"id": "2:219/q28/p3", "position": "Nominative al-ʿafwu answers a nominal question, usually taking mā as interrogative and dhā as relative.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): If ذا is the relative الذي, العفو is nominative as the predicate: what they spend is surplus; compare the two analyses of ماذا in 16:24 and 16:30. | mentions 16:24, 16:30 AKHFASH (أهل التأويل): Exegetes say the disbelievers denied that God sent anything and asked what the people themselves claimed was revealed; the author finds this like 'they are your brothers' in 2:220. | mentions 16:24, 2:220 TAB-FULL (author): With al-ʿafw nominative, mā is linked to dhā, and the reply means “what do they spend?—that which they spend is al-ʿafw.” ZAJJAJ (author): If mā is a noun and dhā a predicate meaning alladhī, al-ʿafw is nominative as the answer to what they spend. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): With rafʿ, mā and dhā are separate: dhā is relative, and al-ʿafw is the predicate answering what they should spend. THALABI (الحسن وقتادة وابن أبي إسحاق وأبو عمرو): These readers use the nominative al-afwu, meaning that what people spend is the surplus; al-Suddi prefers this reading, supported by 16:24. | mentions 16:24 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): With mā plus relative dhā, the question means what thing do they spend, and al-ʿafw is the nominative answer. TABRISI (author): For nominative العفو, ذا means الذي, so the question means what is it that they spend; العفو answers as the predicate of an omitted subject. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The nominative treats dhā as a relative pronoun rather than treating mādhā as one word; the answer then supplies what God sent down. BAYDAWI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw in the nominative. NASAFI-FULL (author): If ما is the subject and ذا a relative pronoun with ينفقون as its clause, the answer العفو matches the question’s nominative syntax. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Alternatively, ما is a nominative interrogative subject and ذا a relative pronoun meaning “that which”; its resumptive pronoun is omitted, so the reply matches in meaning, not wording. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads العفو in the nominative; the preferred parsing makes it the predicate of an omitted subject and treats ما as subject with ذا relative. ITQAN (author): For the nominative reading, al-Suyuti prefers parsing ما as interrogative and ذا as relative, yielding “what they spend is the surplus”; this matches nominal question and answer. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو وي
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
