<<chunk 36, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:219/q29", "question": "Is giving the surplus obligatory or voluntary?", "turns_on": "The extent of mandatory giving and whether the verse itself denotes zakāt are disputed.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q29/p1", "position": "A qualified or exceptional form of giving is discussed.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): العفو is the surplus wealth one spends; al-Farrāʾ says the zakāt obligation later abrogated this ruling. TAB-FULL (عبد الله): The Prophet says to give from surplus, begin with those one supports, and that a person is not blamed for keeping sufficient means. TAB-FULL (author): The Prophet’s statement that the best charity is given from sufficiency confirms al-Ṭabarī’s surplus interpretation. TAB-FULL (author): He also rejects the view that al-ʿafw means whatever amount the owner gives, because that could include the whole wealth and so be exertion, not surplus. TAB-FULL (النبي): When Abū Lubābah offers to give away his wealth in repentance, the Prophet says a third is enough; a similar report is transmitted about Kaʿb ibn Mālik. Al-Ṭabarī uses this against defining al-ʿafw as wealth whose surplus is not apparent. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says zakāt abrogated this instruction. ZAJJAJ (author): People were commanded to give away surplus until alms tax was prescribed; consensus holds zakat rules specify dues on the kinds of property. IBNABIHATIM (السدي، عطاء الخراساني، أبو محمد): Al-Suddi interprets al-afw as surplus wealth and says the command was abrogated by zakat; Ata al-Khurasani is reported similarly. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says this spending command was abrogated by the alms tax. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After this verse, a person kept enough from his earnings for his needs and gave away the remainder until zakat was prescribed. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The zakat verse in Sūrat Barāʾa abrogated this instruction and the earlier commands to give charity before zakat. | mentions 9:60 BAGHAWI-FULL (قتادة وعطاء والسدي): Qatāda, ʿAṭāʾ, and al-Suddī define al-ʿafw as what exceeds one’s needs; the Companions kept necessary expenses and donated the surplus under this rule, later abrogated by the zakat verse. IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعضهم): Some say the command to spend the surplus was abrogated by the later zakat obligation. TABRISI (أبو جعفر الباقر): Abu Jaʿfar al-Baqir says al-ʿafw is what remains after a year’s provisions; he says the zakat verse abrogated this, as al-Suddi also held. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي عن أشياخه): Al-Suddī's authorities say the spending command was abrogated by the zakat obligation. RAZI-FULL (author): The spending command steers between wasteful generosity and miserliness, echoing commands to support kin and travelers, avoid waste, and spend without excess or stinginess. | mentions 17:26, 17:27, 25:67 QURTUBI-FULL (قوم): Others say the verse remains in force and wealth carries an additional due beyond zakat; al-Qurṭubī says the apparent evidence favors the abrogated view. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وعطاء والسدي والقرظي محمد بن كعب وابن أبي ليلى): Al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, ʿAṭāʾ, al-Suddī, Muḥammad ibn Kaʿb al-Quraẓī, Ibn Abī Laylā, and others say to give the surplus after dependents' needs; Ibn ʿAbbās gives the same explanation. NASAFI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is surplus beyond need; early Muslims had to donate surplus after retaining a year’s provisions as farmers or a day’s as artisans, until the zakat verse abrogated the rule. | mentions 9:103 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other thresholds proposed are the surplus beyond a third, or beyond a year’s agricultural subsistence, a month’s for desert folk, or a day’s for laborers; hardship led to zakāt. IBNKATHIR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A prophetic saying teaches that giving away one's surplus is good, hoarding it is harmful, and a person is not blamed for retaining enough. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس، عطاء الخراساني، السدي): Ibn Abbas, ʿAta al-Khurasani, and al-Suddi report the view that the command to give the surplus was abrogated by the zakat verse. BIQAI-FULL (الأصبهاني): Al-Aṣbahānī reports exegetes' view that people kept a year's household needs from gold, silver, crops, and livestock, or one day's needs if they worked, and donated the rest until the zakat verse abrogated this rule. DURR-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says the instruction to give al-afw was later abrogated by zakat. DURR-FULL (كدير الضبي): A Bedouin asks the Prophet for a deed to Paradise and away from Hell: uphold justice and give surplus; when too difficult, feed people and spread peace, or water a needy household from one's camel and waterskin. ITQAN (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿid ibn Jubayr gives three Quranic senses of العفو: pardoning sin, the surplus to spend here, and forbearance between people. | mentions 2:237 SUYUTI-LUBAB (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked what portion of their wealth they should give; the answer was to spend the surplus. ELMALILI (author): Earn wealth through lawful means, then give its surplus beyond necessities to the charitable causes already described. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو ذر): Abu Dharr held hoarding wealth forbidden and preached this in Syria; Muawiya complained to Uthman, who recalled him to Medina and settled him at al-Rabadha at his request to avert discord. TABATABAI (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas reports that companions ordered to spend in God's cause asked how much to give; the verse answered that they should give the surplus, after one man had given away even what he needed to eat. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): As wine and gambling began to be prohibited, people who used them to aid the poor asked what to give; God answered “al-afw,” meaning surplus after needs or a suitable part of it. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Broadening aid beyond gambling proceeds and zakat to surplus goods, food, and clothing promotes social justice and makes unmet basic needs rare."}, {"id": "2:219/q29/p2", "position": "Surplus beyond need carries a required claim or was once required to be given.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid is also reported as identifying al-ʿafw with obligatory charity; Abū ʿĀṣim is uncertain in the transmission from Qays. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects equating al-ʿafw with obligatory zakāt: after neglect, even a person whose remaining property is only the zakāt due must pay it, which is exertion rather than surplus. TAB-FULL (بعض أهل العلم): Some scholars say the verse was abrogated by the obligatory zakāt; the dispute continues in the following segments. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says this instruction came before charity was made obligatory. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī argues abrogation is unproven: scholars agree a person may give charity, gifts, and bequests up to a third, and no evidence shows this guidance was once obligatory and then removed by zakāt. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد عن قيس المكي): A report through Qays al-Makki says Mujahid defined al-afw as the obligatory charity. THALABI (author): After the Prophet encouraged charity without making it obligatory, people asked what to spend and whom to give it to. THALABI (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says people kept a year's family expenses and gave the rest, or kept one day's earnings if they worked by hand; obligatory zakat later abrogated this verse and earlier charity commands. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): A second view from Mujahid takes al-afw as the obligatory charity. WAHIDI-BASIT (أهل التفسير): Exegetes say people were told to give surplus, keeping a year’s expenses; obligatory zakat later abrogated this verse and earlier charity commands. IBNATIYYA-FULL (آخرون): Others hold the verse remains in force and establishes a claim on wealth beyond zakat. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets al-ʿafw as the obligatory charity. RAZI-FULL (author): Another obligatory-spending view dates the command before the alms verse: people kept a year's needs and gave the remainder; the later alms verse abrogated it. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī answers that God can impose a general obligation first and explain its details elsewhere, so lack of an amount here does not disprove obligation. RAZI-FULL (النبي): A Prophetic report says the exemption from alms on horses and slaves lightens the obligation; instead, a quarter-tenth of other wealth is due. QURTUBI-FULL (الكلبي): Al-Kalbī says the command was abrogated by obligatory zakat: a wealthy person kept a year's provision and gave the rest, while a worker kept one day's needs and gave the rest. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the required pre-zakāt surplus was what remained above one thousand dirhams, or its equivalent in gold. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid identifies al-ʿafw with obligatory charity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Some say the question concerns obligatory giving, specifically zakāt, whose details were later set out by the Sunna. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says people were required before zakāt to give earnings beyond their annual needs, and that duty was superseded by the zakāt verse. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī defines al-ʿafw as what a person freely gives without strain; the command encourages giving the surplus but does not make that level obligatory, preserving ease for this community. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid is reported as taking al-afw here to mean obligatory charity. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says it is sufficient sin to withhold provision from someone whose needs one controls; Abdullah ibn Amr therefore sends his steward to feed the enslaved people. IBNASHUR-FULL (قيس بن سعد): Qays ibn Saʿd says the verse concerns obligatory zakat; al- then refers to externally defined growth at the zakat threshold. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): People should meet their own and close relatives’ needs first; providing maintenance to some relatives is a legal and moral duty for those able to do so. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Ebû Zer el-Gıfârî): Abu Dharr held that surplus wealth may not be hoarded or invested for profit and must go to the needy while they remain."}, {"id": "2:219/q2
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
