<<chunk 36, part 5 of 0..5>>
?", "turns_on": "The conjunction may track revelation occasions, the earlier spending question, or the transition to proper giving.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q34/p1", "position": "This question follows 2:215: that verse identifies recipients, while this one gives the amount.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (عمرو بن الجموح): After the answer about parents and kin, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamuh asked how much to spend, prompting revelation of say, the surplus. | mentions 2:215 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (عمرو بن الجموح): After the verse about spending for parents and relatives, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked again how much should be spent. | mentions 2:215 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The earlier question asks whom to spend on and is answered accordingly; this question asks how much to spend, concerning ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ, who had asked about the amount. | mentions 2:215 QURTUBI-FULL (author): After 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked how much to spend, and the answer about al-ʿafw addressed that amount. | mentions 2:215 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The question follows discussion of charitable spending and fighting because wine and gambling consume wealth that might otherwise go to charity or jihad. | mentions 2:215, 2:216 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The spending question had already been asked; this answer now clarifies the quantity or amount to spend. | mentions 2:215 BIQAI-FULL (author): The conjunction links this spending question to the earlier question and answer about spending in 2:215, which made another spending question expectable; questions about orphans and menstruation lacked that setup. | mentions 2:215 BURSEVI (author): The charity question continues the topic of what to spend raised by the earlier verse; when 2:215 was revealed, ʿAmr ibn al-Jamūḥ asked what he should spend, prompting the instruction al-ʿafw. | mentions 2:215 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Another view identifies Amr ibn al-Jamuh as questioner, answered in 2:215 and here, with each answer suited to context. | mentions 2:215 TABATABAI (author): The question and answer about what to spend match the earlier question answered by saying that whatever good is spent goes to parents and relatives. | mentions 2:215 STUDYQURAN (author): This verse expands on 2:215 by addressing how much to give, complementing that verse’s account of charity’s recipients. | mentions 2:215"}, {"id": "2:219/q34/p2", "position": "The conjunction or repeated question connects the wine and gambling discussion with proper spending and neighboring topics.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): The verse's legal discussion is organized around wine and its analogues, gambling, spending, and the verse's proofs. RAZI-FULL (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr reads al-ʿafw with nominative wāw, parsing mā as a relative pronoun and the question as “what is it that they spend?”; others read it accusative as the answer “they spend the surplus.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other possible referents include the rulings on wine and gambling, spending, fighting and the sacred month, the destination and reward of spending, or the amount to spend. | mentions 2:216, 2:217 BIQAI-FULL (author): The author says the intervening verses were concluded by returning to the theme of striving with which they began, before later verses on permissions. | mentions 2:218 BIQAI-FULL (author): The repeated question about what to spend signals repeated prompting and the great importance of spending, which is among the principal supports of jihad. BIQAI-FULL (author): He rejects revelation together versus separately as a sufficient reason for the conjunction, since it gives no wisdom and many revelation reports show conjunctions; the last revealed verse, 2:281, also begins with wa. | mentions 2:281 BIQAI-FULL (البيهقي): The author cites al-Bayhaqī and al-Wāḥidī for reports that 2:281 was the final revealed verse, noting its opening conjunction; al-Bukhārī also gives it a chapter heading. | mentions 2:281 BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī reads the conjunction as reinforcing the repeated seeking twice, like the Israelites' case; this community may have avoided asking a third time, unlike them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The spending question accompanied the wine-and-gambling question, so its answer is joined by waw; banning them threatened aid to the poor, making proper spending relevant."}, {"id": "2:219/q34/p3", "position": "The conjunction pattern reflects different times or joint occurrence of questions.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): The first three questions appear without conjunction because they arose at separate times; the later questions are joined with wāw because they were asked together. | mentions 2:215, 2:220, 2:222 ITQAN (الكرماني): Al-Karmani explains that four “they ask you” questions lack a conjunction because they were asked at separate times; three later questions use one because they arose together. Against — BIQAI-FULL (author): He rejects revelation together versus separately as a sufficient reason for the conjunction, since it gives no wisdom and many revelation reports show conjunctions; the last revealed verse, 2:281, also begins with wa. | mentions 2:281"}]}
{"id": "2:219/q35", "question": "What inward meanings are drawn from wine, gambling, and giving?", "turns_on": "The inward reading distinguishes worldly heedlessness, spiritual intoxication, and grades of generosity.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q35/p1", "position": "Wine signifies caprice or heedlessness and gambling the soul’s stratagems; their sin veils one from God.", "reasons": "SULAMI (بعضهم): Some people become transformed by the Divine Presence without realizing it. QASHANI (author): Wine signifies caprice and love of the world; gambling signifies the soul's contrivance to secure its meager share. QASHANI (author): Their sin is veiling and distance from God. QASHANI (author): Their benefits are livelihood and psychic pleasure, including relief from troubling traits and worries through heedlessness. BURSEVI (author): The cited Mathnawī couplet urges disciplining the soul away from Satan, keeping angelic company, and feeding it lawful sustenance that brings light and perfection. BURSEVI (author): As outward wine comes from grapes, dates, raisins, and grains, inward wine comes from heedlessness, desire, caprice, and love of the world; these intoxicate the human soul and intellect and are sinful. BURSEVI (author): The al-Taʾwīlāt al-Najmiyya reading says sins outweigh benefits because the sins affect the many while benefits belong to the elect, and the many outnumber the elect. BURSEVI (author): The inward benefit of gambling is disregard for both worlds and effacement of worldly forms in the singularity of the Kaaba's imprint."}, {"id": "2:219/q35/p2", "position": "Spiritual wine signifies ecstatic witnessing and can be lawful or beneficial.", "reasons": "SULAMI (طاوس وسالم): On 36:55, they remarked that knowing whom the people of Paradise were distracted from would have changed how they enjoyed their occupation. | mentions 36:55 BURSEVI (author): A different spiritual wine intoxicates hearts, spirits, and secrets: it is the drink of spiritual arrivals in cups of witnessing, poured by the cupbearer of divine attributes' self-disclosure. BURSEVI (author): That spiritual drink quiets appetites; hearts are absorbed in ecstasies, spirits in witnessing, and secrets in the glimpse of beauty, so it is beneficial and lawful. BURSEVI (author): Some are intoxicated by the drink's existence, others by witnessing its cupbearer; a couplet contrasts their states. BURSEVI (author): In the spiritual journey, turning away from the cups of union at the end is a greater loss than a thousand years of seeking at the beginning is a gain. BURSEVI (author): Just as a wine-drunk person is barred from prayer, one drunk with heedlessness and caprice is veiled from communion. BURSEVI (author): The inward sin of gambling is the prevalence of trickery, deception, lying, and foul speech in the way people pursue the spiritual path; it is grave to the elect and alien to the righteous."}, {"id": "2:219/q35/p3", "position": "Giving beyond need or effacing attachment to one’s gift expresses higher spiritual generosity.", "reasons": "BURSEVI (author): Al-ʿafw also hints that a donor's gift should leave no trace in the heart, meaning it should be given freely and cheerfully; the root sense is erasure. BURSEVI (author): The elect give from wealth beyond sufficiency, while the elite of the elite practice selfless preference and give what they need, even to a wealthy recipient. BURSEVI (author): The highest form of self-preference is supported by the verse describing believers who give others priority even while themselves in need. | mentions 59:9 BURSEVI (النبي عليه السلام): A report says the Prophet described the distance between ʿUmar and Abū Bakr as like the difference between their two answers about what they left for their families; no grading is given. BURSEVI (author): The account shows Abū Bakr's superiority over ʿUmar in this respect, but excellence in one matter does not establish inferiority in every other matter; ranking depends on knowledge of God."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q36", "question": "Where is the verse ending counted?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q36/p1", "position": "Kufan counting ends a verse at tatafakkarūn, unlike other regional counts.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The Kufans count two verses across 2:219–220 and treat تتفكرون as a verse ending; the other regional count has one verse and does not count that word as a verse ending."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
