<<chunk 36, part 2 of 0..5>>
gated; Ibn Kathir prefers this interpretation."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q31", "question": "What does كَذَٰلِكَ point back to and how does it work?", "turns_on": "The demonstrative may point to spending, wine and gambling, or the whole preceding explanation; its singular address has several parses.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q31/p1", "position": "Its kāf and singular form are explained through an omitted verbal noun, collective address, or address to the Prophet.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): The Prophet's address also addresses his community; singular address followed by a plural is common in Arabic and frequent in the Qur’an. | mentions 65:1 ZAJJAJ (author): A plural group can be treated as a collective tribe and referred to with singular dhālika; the Qur’an likewise uses dhālika after addressing the Prophet's wives with minkunna. | mentions 33:30 THALABI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj explains the singular verb addressed to a plural audience by saying a group is treated as a single tribe or collective. THALABI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj also allows the address to be directed to the Prophet, whose address includes his community, as in 65:1. | mentions 65:1 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The singular demonstrative is addressed to a plural because a group is grammatically treated as a tribe or collective. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The Qurʾan uses a singular demonstrative for a plural group, as in the address to the Prophet’s wives followed by that is easy for God. | mentions 33:30 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Alternatively the kāf addresses the Prophet alone; addressing him includes his community, as in the verse O Prophet, when you divorce women. | mentions 65:1 BAGHAWI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj says the singular كذلك addresses a plural because the group is treated as one collective, as if addressed as a single tribe. BAGHAWI-FULL (قيل): Another explanation takes the address as directed to the Prophet, whose address includes the community, as in 65:1. | mentions 65:1 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Khamr is named for covering the intellect and discernment; sakr likewise names its blocking of them, and khamr may be an intensive verbal noun from covering. TABRISI (author): The demonstrative’s kāf is singular because the address is to the Prophet, while including the community. TABRISI (author): Another construal makes the address “thus, people of this group.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Although the address is plural, al-Zajjāj says the collective means a group or community, as if addressed as a tribe. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Alternatively, the k-prefix may address the Prophet, whose address includes his community. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): “Thus” refers either to showing that surplus is better than exhausting effort or to the rulings just stated; kāf is an accusative adjective for an omitted verbal noun, and the singular is collective in sense. NASAFI-FULL (author): The kāf in كذلك modifies an omitted verbal noun in the accusative: an explanation like this explanation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The kāf in كذلك either qualifies an omitted verbal noun or, on Sībawayh’s account, functions circumstantially: God explains in a manner like that explanation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The singular address in the demonstrative may address the Prophet, a listener, or a group; singular address to a group is Arabic usage, and لكم confirms collective address. BIQAI-FULL (author): The initial singular address raises the statement's rank and turns it toward the Prophet, already filled with knowledge; the plural then addresses followers according to their understanding and aspiration. Alternatively, the syntax repeats the act of explaining. BURSEVI (author): The kāf is accusative as an adjective for an omitted absolute object, meaning clarification like this; singular address can target a plural audience conceived as a group. ALUSI-FULL (author): The kāf is accusative as an adjective of an omitted noun, while the definite article in “the signs” is generic: God clarifies rulings by clear revelation, another verse, or the Prophet’s explanation. ALUSI-FULL (author): Although a plural form might be expected to match “for you,” the demonstrative stays singular by construing it as a collective noun with singular form, for lighter expression. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Another explanation says the singular signals every recipient of the address, as in “We pardoned you after that” (2:52); al-Alusi objects that this would create multiple addressees within one uncoordinated sentence. | mentions 2:52 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The demonstrative is not directly addressed to the plural, so it stays kadhālika rather than expected kadhālikum; its distance is abstract and honorific. TABATABAI (author): Although benefits is plural earlier, the comparison says benefit in the singular: plurality does not affect greatness, so the quantity of benefits is left out of the comparison."}, {"id": "2:219/q31/p2", "position": "It means in this manner without one required antecedent.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ likewise places the benefits before prohibition and the sin after it, an interpretation Tabari rejects. THALABI (عمر بن الخطاب): Saʿid ibn al-Musayyib reports that Umar diluted a drink offered by Thaqif and told them to do likewise. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Alternatively, “thus” need not point back to the preceding material and simply means “in this way.” RAZI-FULL (author): Whether ithm means punishment or the sins that deserve punishment, it can only describe what is forbidden; calling the sin greater than the benefit likewise entails prohibition. QURTUBI-FULL (بعض المفسرين): Some exegetes say God bestowed every honor and good on this community and prescribed laws gradually rather than all at once; wine prohibition likewise came in stages. NASHR (author): The joined form ماذا has six possible analyses: interrogative plus demonstrative, interrogative plus relative, compound interrogative, a single noun meaning thing, extra ما plus demonstrative, or interrogative ما plus extra ذا. ITQAN (author): Other possible parses make ذا demonstrative, ماذا a noun meaning “something” or a relative, ما extra, or ذا extra after interrogative ما. ALUSI-FULL (author): Deriving “wine” from its covering the mind does not prove that the word covers every intoxicant; “star” likewise derives from appearing but names a particular star. ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking “thus” to refer only to “their sin is greater than their benefit” is remote. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Kadhālika means clarification in this manner, with the demonstrative specifying how God clarifies; Ibn Ashur recalls 2:143. | mentions 2:143"}, {"id": "2:219/q31/p3", "position": "It refers to the clarification about giving surplus and the right amount of spending.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī likewise glosses al-ʿafw as surplus. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Thus points to the explanation of spending: just as He explained al-ʿafw, God clarifies signs so people reflect and know the afterlife is superior. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī says “thus” points back to the explanation of spending: in the same way, God makes the signs clear. RAZI-FULL (author): God has clarified the kinds and destinations of spending asked about and will likewise explain all that people need in the days ahead. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī says the demonstrative most immediately refers to the clarification of the proper amount and condition for spending. BIQAI-FULL (author): Having detailed the rulings and spending through varied explanations, the verse reassures that God explains the signs likewise; al-Ḥarālī says the plural covers the heart, soul, body, and a person's dealings with others."}, {"id": "2:219/q31/p4", "position": "It refers to the explanations about wine, gambling, and spending or the preceding rulings together.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Likewise may refer either to God’s explanation concerning wine and gambling or to His explanation about spending. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): “Thus God makes the signs clear” refers to the preceding discussions of wine, gambling, and spending; the signs guide believers to reflect on worldly and afterlife matters as a path to salvation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Other possible referents include the rulings on wine and gambling, spending, fighting and the sacred month, the destination and reward of spending, or the amount to spend. | mentions 2:216, 2:217 ALUSI-FULL (author): “Thus” may point to the explanation that surplus charity is better than exhausting one’s means because it preserves resources and benefits the afterlife; it may also encompass the whole preceding discussion. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Alternatively, the demonstrative points to the preceding explanation; its distant form magnifies disclosure of rulings, causes, and a spending principle suited to everyone."}, {"id": "2:219/q31/p5", "position": "It refers particularly to the clarification about wine and gambling.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Another interpretation takes thus as referring to God’s clarification about wine and gambling. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): It is too restrictive to make the demonstrative refer only to wine and gambling; even farther-fetched is taking it to cover every ruling mentioned earlier in the sūra. Against — ALUSI-FULL (author): Taking “thus” to refer only to “their sin is greater than their benefit” is remote."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q32", "question": "What are the ٱلْءَايَٰتِ God makes clear?", "turns_on": "The scope of the signs and the purpose of clarification differ in breadth.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q32/p1", "position": "They are the signs, proofs, and rulings concerning the topics just discussed.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): As God clarified the direction and limits of spending in His way, He clarifies other signs, their rulings, lawful and forbidden matters, and their proofs as a favor to people. ZAJJAJ (author): The clarification about wine and gambling exemplifies how God makes His s
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
