<<chunk 36, part 1 of 0..5>>
9/p3", "position": "The instruction guides voluntary charity while obligatory maintenance and zakāt remain separately due.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī holds, following Ibn ʿAbbās as transmitted by ʿAṭiyya, that this is guidance about approved voluntary giving, not a divine obligation; it remains in force and is neither superseded nor superseding. TAB-FULL (author): This etiquette governs voluntary alms, gifts, and grants: spend first on oneself, family, and children, then direct remaining surplus to pleasing purposes. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور العلماء): Most scholars interpret the spending requested here as voluntary expenditure. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Others deny abrogation; the author distinguishes the rulings by the interpretation: a required surplus or pre-zakat charity was abrogated, while zakat itself or recommended charity remains operative. RAZI-FULL (author): The alternative view takes the spending as voluntary charity: because God leaves its amount to the addressee's judgment, it cannot be obligatory. QURTUBI-FULL (قيس بن سعد): Qays ibn Saʿd identifies the commanded spending as obligatory zakat, whereas the majority say it is voluntary spending. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور العلماء): The majority of scholars say this command concerns voluntary expenditure rather than obligatory zakat. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The spending may be for jihad or charity; most who say charity understand voluntary almsgiving. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الراغب): Al-Rāghib says al-ʿafw covers both obligatory and voluntary giving and means surplus beyond comfortable means. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): This supports voluntary spending: consensus and the wider law require obligatory maintenance and zakat, which may be drawn from surplus wealth. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İslâm âlimlerinin büyük çoğunluğu): The majority hold that obligatory transfers are limited to maintenance and zakat; other giving is voluntary, rewarded if done but not sinful to omit. STUDYQURAN (author): Commentators disagree whether the spending command concerns voluntary charity or a required duty. Against — RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī answers that God can impose a general obligation first and explain its details elsewhere, so lack of an amount here does not disprove obligation."}, {"id": "2:219/q29/p4", "position": "The verse itself gives the general zakāt duty.", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets al-afw as the obligatory alms. JISHUMI (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets al-ʿafw as the obligatory alms. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قيس بن سعد): Qays b. Saʿd interprets “the surplus” to be the obligatory alms tax. RAZI-FULL (أبو مسلم): Abū Muslim says al-ʿafw may mean obligatory alms: the verse states the obligation generally while its details are given in the Sunna. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī sorts spending into obligatory alms, dispensable surplus that should not be hoarded, and contested property whose donation requires striving and becomes a trade for the afterlife. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas glosses al-afw as an amount not conspicuous in one's property and says this preceded obligatory alms. Against — TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects equating al-ʿafw with obligatory zakāt: after neglect, even a person whose remaining property is only the zakāt due must pay it, which is exertion rather than surplus."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q30", "question": "Was the spending instruction abrogated by zakāt?", "turns_on": "Whether the earlier direction imposed a superseded duty, remains voluntary guidance, or was specified by zakāt.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q30/p1", "position": "The earlier instruction to give surplus was superseded by the fixed zakāt obligation.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): العفو is the surplus wealth one spends; al-Farrāʾ says the zakāt obligation later abrogated this ruling. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the passage was superseded by three verses in al-Māʾida and discusses the Prophet’s wine punishment: he treated it as a hadd by his judgment, not a fixed, named hadd. | mentions 5:90 TAB-FULL (بعض أهل العلم): Some scholars say the verse was abrogated by the obligatory zakāt; the dispute continues in the following segments. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says no fixed amount was prescribed at first; 7:199 followed, and named obligations were revealed afterward. | mentions 7:199 TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says zakāt abrogated this instruction. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the statement about sin and benefits in this verse was abrogated by the final prohibition in 5:90. | mentions 5:90 IBNABIHATIM (السدي، عطاء الخراساني، أبو محمد): Al-Suddi interprets al-afw as surplus wealth and says the command was abrogated by zakat; Ata al-Khurasani is reported similarly. THALABI (الكلبي): Al-Kalbi says people kept a year's family expenses and gave the rest, or kept one day's earnings if they worked by hand; obligatory zakat later abrogated this verse and earlier charity commands. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says this spending command was abrogated by the alms tax. WAHIDI-BASIT (أهل التفسير): Exegetes say people were told to give surplus, keeping a year’s expenses; obligatory zakat later abrogated this verse and earlier charity commands. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The zakat verse in Sūrat Barāʾa abrogated this instruction and the earlier commands to give charity before zakat. | mentions 9:60 BAGHAWI-FULL (قتادة وعطاء والسدي): Qatāda, ʿAṭāʾ, and al-Suddī define al-ʿafw as what exceeds one’s needs; the Companions kept necessary expenses and donated the surplus under this rule, later abrogated by the zakat verse. IBNATIYYA-FULL (طائفة): Some say the verse’s apparent allowance in mentioning benefits was abrogated by the command to avoid wine and gambling. | mentions 5:90 IBNATIYYA-FULL (بعضهم): Some say the command to spend the surplus was abrogated by the later zakat obligation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي عن أشياخه، سعيد بن جبير، مجاهد، قتادة، مقاتل): One position says the verse censures wine without prohibiting it, so this verse was abrogated. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (السدي عن أشياخه): Al-Suddī's authorities say the spending command was abrogated by the zakat obligation. RAZI-FULL (author): Razi answers the blessing argument: an indefinite mention of sugar and good provision does not prove that the disputed nabidh is meant; the earlier verse was superseded or qualified by the later prohibitions. | mentions 16:67 RAZI-FULL (author): Another obligatory-spending view dates the command before the alms verse: people kept a year's needs and gave the remainder; the later alms verse abrogated it. QURTUBI-FULL (الكلبي): Al-Kalbī says the command was abrogated by obligatory zakat: a wealthy person kept a year's provision and gave the rest, while a worker kept one day's needs and gave the rest. NASAFI-FULL (author): Al-ʿafw is surplus beyond need; early Muslims had to donate surplus after retaining a year’s provisions as farmers or a day’s as artisans, until the zakat verse abrogated the rule. | mentions 9:103 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (بعض من ألف في الناسخ والمنسوخ): Some works on abrogation say most scholars regard this verse as abrogating the prior permissibility of wine, setting aside the Meccan Anʿām passage. | mentions 6:145 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مكي): Makkī takes the sequence reported by Ibn Jubayr to show that this verse was abrogated by the later prohibition in al-Māʾida. | mentions 5:90 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view says people were required before zakāt to give earnings beyond their annual needs, and that duty was superseded by the zakāt verse. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس، عطاء الخراساني، السدي): Ibn Abbas, ʿAta al-Khurasani, and al-Suddi report the view that the command to give the surplus was abrogated by the zakat verse. BIQAI-FULL (الأصبهاني): Al-Aṣbahānī reports exegetes' view that people kept a year's household needs from gold, silver, crops, and livestock, or one day's needs if they worked, and donated the rest until the zakat verse abrogated this rule. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says this verse was abrogated by the later declaration in 5:90. | mentions 5:90 DURR-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddi says the instruction to give al-afw was later abrogated by zakat. STUDYQURAN (Some): Some consider the charity directive abrogated by the institution of zakāh. Against — TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī argues abrogation is unproven: scholars agree a person may give charity, gifts, and bequests up to a third, and no evidence shows this guidance was once obligatory and then removed by zakāt."}, {"id": "2:219/q30/p2", "position": "The guidance remains operative as voluntary giving or a further claim on wealth.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (آخرون): Other scholars hold that the verse remains in force and was not abrogated. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī argues abrogation is unproven: scholars agree a person may give charity, gifts, and bequests up to a third, and no evidence shows this guidance was once obligatory and then removed by zakāt. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid says the command concerning al-afw remains in force. IBNATIYYA-FULL (آخرون): Others hold the verse remains in force and establishes a claim on wealth beyond zakat. TABRISI (أبو جعفر الباقر): Abu Jaʿfar al-Baqir says al-ʿafw is what remains after a year’s provisions; he says the zakat verse abrogated this, as al-Suddi also held. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Others deny abrogation; the author distinguishes the rulings by the interpretation: a required surplus or pre-zakat charity was abrogated, while zakat itself or recommended charity remains operative. QURTUBI-FULL (قوم): Others say the verse remains in force and wealth carries an additional due beyond zakat; al-Qurṭubī says the apparent evidence favors the abrogated view. STUDYQURAN (Others): Others see no contradiction between zakāh and a continuing command to give charity."}, {"id": "2:219/q30/p3", "position": "Zakāt specifies or explains the general instruction without abrogating it.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (مجاهد وغيره): Mujahid and others say the command is explained by the zakat verse rather than abro
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
