<<chunk 36, part 3 of 0..5>>
igns clear. ZAJJAJ (author): Alternatively, in this world and the next may attach to God clarifies the signs, meaning signs concerning both worlds are clarified so people reflect. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Even if harms arise from effects of wine and gambling, revelation assigns blame to them; gambling includes wrongful taking of wealth. | mentions 5:91, 4:29 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Thus points to the explanation of spending: just as He explained al-ʿafw, God clarifies signs so people reflect and know the afterlife is superior. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): God explains the signs so people reflect on this world and the next and recognize the superiority of the afterlife over worldly life. JISHUMI (author): The phrase may mean that God explains proofs concerning spending, wine, and gambling. BAGHAWI-FULL (قيل): One view says the signs about spending prompt people to reserve what sustains worldly life and give the remainder for the afterlife. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A further construction attaches the phrase to يبين: God clarifies signs about both abodes and their concerns so people may reflect. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): “Thus God makes the signs clear” refers to the preceding discussions of wine, gambling, and spending; the signs guide believers to reflect on worldly and afterlife matters as a path to salvation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مكي): Makkī reads “in this world and the next” as modifying “the signs,” while the familiar interpretation associated with Ibn ʿAbbās attaches it to “reflect.” TABRISI (author): The signs are proofs concerning spending, wine, and gambling. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (بعض المفسرين): Āyāt can mean commands and prohibitions that God makes clear. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī says “thus” points back to the explanation of spending: in the same way, God makes the signs clear. RAZI-FULL (author): The signs teach that wine and gambling bring worldly benefits but afterlife harms; reflection should lead people to prefer the next life over this one. QURTUBI-FULL (المفضل بن سلمة): Al-Mufaḍḍal ibn Salama says God's clarification of the signs here concerns spending. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The signs are explained so people may reflect on the proofs and legal rulings. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Here āyāt means signs and evidences; clear explanation is intended to lead people to reflect on worldly and afterlife concerns. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another explanation is that reflection concerns God’s commands and prohibitions, leading to obedience in this life and reward in the next. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan attaches “in this world and the next” to God’s explaining the signs rather than to people’s reflection. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): If explanation occurs only in this life, the phrase must mean signs concerning both abodes; if signs appear in both, no reinterpretation is needed. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية ومكي): Ibn ʿAṭiyya and Makkī explain that God shows believers signs in this world and the next, indicating both abodes and their standing so people will reflect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): God explains the signs as He has clarified wine, gambling, and spending, so that reflection on this world and the next may lead people to prefer the afterlife. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathir points back to the many early reports on reflection and taking lessons that he cited under the verse about signs in creation in Al Imran. | mentions 3:190 BIQAI-FULL (الأصمعي): Al-Asmaʿi instead assigns 28 shares to the arrows, beginning with one for al-fadh and two for al-taw'am; the author reports that most scholars disagreed and considered him mistaken. BIQAI-FULL (author): Having detailed the rulings and spending through varied explanations, the verse reassures that God explains the signs likewise; al-Ḥarālī says the plural covers the heart, soul, body, and a person's dealings with others. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the signs invite reflection on this world and the next: the world's disappearance and the afterlife's enduring life. BURSEVI (القفال): Al-Qaffāl explains the staged ban as gentle instruction: people were accustomed to wine and benefited from it, so an immediate prohibition would have burdened them; after the final ruling, it was poured out. BURSEVI (author): God makes the signs concerning legal rulings clear in their import and indication, not after they were obscure or confused. ALUSI-FULL (author): The kāf is accusative as an adjective of an omitted noun, while the definite article in “the signs” is generic: God clarifies rulings by clear revelation, another verse, or the Prophet’s explanation. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān rejects saying the phrase syntactically attaches to الآيات: a noun cannot govern the prepositional phrase; it must modify the noun through an implicit participle or state."}, {"id": "2:219/q32/p2", "position": "Their clarification reveals reasons and purposes so people can act knowingly.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The invitation to reflect means using reason to consider God's proofs, take heed, act on their rulings, and thereby obey Him. RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī says Muḥammad's law balances these matters, unlike the Jews' complete severity and Christians' complete leniency, and is therefore more complete. RAZI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan proposes fronting and postponement: “in this world and the next” belongs with God's explaining the signs, before the purpose clause “so that you reflect.” ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): لكم is governed by يبين; its lām conveys information to someone as in “I said to you,” while a causal reading is unlikely. BURHAN (author): The phrase لعلكم تتفكرون occurs twice in al-Baqara. BIQAI-FULL (author): The author frames the question and gradual explanation as an expression of divine forbearance, leaving matters beyond the subject at pure permissibility. ALUSI-FULL (author): Placing sin first, describing it as great or numerous, and delaying benefits while limiting them to people signals the dominance of the harm. ELMALILI (author): God explains legal signs and proofs so people may reflect, understand their purposes, and act on them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The lām expresses favor and distinction: this lucid teaching lets the community receive duties knowingly and its scholars legislate. TABATABAI (author): The verse does not explain the ruling merely by harm; even on that assumption, it explicitly says the sin outweighs the benefit, so appeal to independent Companion reasoning contradicts the text. TABATABAI (author): Tabyīn here means uncovering the reasons behind rulings and clarifying the foundations of teachings and knowledge. Against — RAZI-FULL (author): Rāzī rejects al-Ḥasan's fronting because the straightforward readings preserve the apparent word order, and no evidence requires departing from it. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The proposed fronting-and-delaying analysis is unnecessary: لعل functions causally, so it and the locative phrase are both complements of يبين; an intervening parenthesis is another possible parsing."}, {"id": "2:219/q32/p3", "position": "They are all divine ordinances, commands, prohibitions, promises, and warnings.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Another view takes the explained signs as all the ordinances of Islam. TABRISI (author): Another explanation takes the signs to mean all the rulings of Islam. TABRISI (author): Alternatively, “in this world and the hereafter” attaches to “He makes clear”: God explains signs in those matters so people ponder, showing He intends reflection whether or not they actually reflect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مكي): Makkī treats الآيات as indefinite, making the two prepositional phrases descriptions of signs existing in both abodes; Abū Ḥayyān calls this a semantic paraphrase. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): As God clarified these rulings, He clarifies the rest of His verses concerning rulings, promise, and warning so people will reflect on worldly life and the Hereafter. ALUSI-FULL (author): Contemplating the signs means deriving rulings and understanding the interests and benefits attached to them; this makes reflection a fitting aim of their clarification."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q33", "question": "What reflection does لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَفَكَّرُونَ call for?", "turns_on": "Sources emphasize the two abodes, practical spending, obedience to rulings, or broad reflection.", "positions": [{"id": "2:219/q33/p1", "position": "Reflect on the passing world and lasting afterlife, then prefer what endures.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): Qatada says reflection on this world and the next lets people recognize the superiority of the afterlife over worldly life. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says reflection concerns the world's passing and perishing and the hereafter's coming and permanence. ZAJJAJ (author): In this world and the next may attach to you reflect, meaning reflect on the affairs of both worlds. ZAJJAJ (author): Alternatively, in this world and the next may attach to God clarifies the signs, meaning signs concerning both worlds are clarified so people reflect. NAHHAS (author): The reflection invited here concerns both worldly life and the Hereafter. THALABI (أكثر المفسرين): Most exegetes say the reflection concerns the world's passing and the afterlife's approach, leading people to turn from the world and desire the afterlife. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): God explains the signs so people reflect on this world and the next and recognize the superiority of the afterlife over worldly life. JISHUMI (أبو مسلم): Abu Muslim says the reflection concerns the pleasures of this world and the reward of the hereafter. BAGHAWI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين): Most commentators say reflection on the world's passing and the afterlife's permanence should lessen attachment to the former and increase desire for the latter. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Another construction connects the reflection to the greater sin: compare the afterlife's punishment with worldly benefit, rather than choosing immediate gain over escape from grave punishment. 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
