<<chunk 36, part 4 of 0..5>>
IBNATIYYA-FULL (مكي): Makkī reads “in this world and the next” as modifying “the signs,” while the familiar interpretation associated with Ibn ʿAbbās attaches it to “reflect.” TABRISI (author): Their sin outweighs their worldly benefit because it incurs God’s displeasure in the afterlife, leaving only a small, impermanent gain. TABRISI (author): The governing word for “in this world and the hereafter” is يبين; it may instead depend on تتفكرون. TABRISI (author): Here “this world and the hereafter” means their affairs. TABRISI (author): Pondering worldly and afterlife affairs shows that this life is trial, hardship, and passing, while the afterlife is recompense and permanence, prompting renunciation of one and desire for the other. TABRISI (author): Alternatively, “in this world and the hereafter” attaches to “He makes clear”: God explains signs in those matters so people ponder, showing He intends reflection whether or not they actually reflect. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Reflecting on this world and the next lets people recognize their difference and act for the one that lasts. RAZI-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan proposes fronting and postponement: “in this world and the next” belongs with God's explaining the signs, before the purpose clause “so that you reflect.” RAZI-FULL (author): The signs teach that wine and gambling bring worldly benefits but afterlife harms; reflection should lead people to prefer the next life over this one. QURTUBI-FULL (author): God says the sin is greater and more harmful in the afterlife than the worldly benefits; the great sin is reckoned after prohibition, while the benefits were before it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Here āyāt means signs and evidences; clear explanation is intended to lead people to reflect on worldly and afterlife concerns. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Abū Ḥayyān prefers attaching “in this world and the next” to reflection generally, rather than limiting reflection to one particular matter. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī says people should consider what concerns both abodes and choose what is best for themselves. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس والزمخشري): Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Zamakhsharī explain that people should reflect on the world’s passing and the afterlife’s permanence, then work for what endures. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī also links reflection to wine’s worldly benefits and afterlife harms, and to holding back worldly means while giving for the hereafter. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan attaches “in this world and the next” to God’s explaining the signs rather than to people’s reflection. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية ومكي): Ibn ʿAṭiyya and Makkī explain that God shows believers signs in this world and the next, indicating both abodes and their standing so people will reflect. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): As God clarified these rulings, He clarifies the rest of His verses concerning rulings, promise, and warning so people will reflect on worldly life and the Hereafter. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the signs invite reflection on this world and the next: the world's disappearance and the afterlife's enduring life. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says reflection on both worlds teaches the superiority of the afterlife over this world. DURR-FULL (الحسن): Hasan says a thoughtful person recognizes this world as trial followed by extinction, and the afterlife as recompense followed by permanence. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada says reflection reveals the world's trial and extinction and the afterlife's permanence and recompense, so people should set aside worldly needs for the next life. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Calling the outcome ithm signals that users incur punishment in this world and the next. IBNASHUR-FULL (علي بن أبي طالب): Ali answers a man disparaging worldly life by describing it as truthful, saving, enriching for those who use it well, and a place of revelation and worship. TABATABAI (author): Although the Qur’an commands full obedience to God and His Messenger, it does not approve receiving its rulings and teachings through blind rigidity without thought and reason."}, {"id": "2:219/q33/p2", "position": "Reflect on God’s proofs and rulings, understand their wisdom, and obey.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The invitation to reflect means using reason to consider God's proofs, take heed, act on their rulings, and thereby obey Him. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid glosses the phrase as “that you obey.” | mentions 2:266 THALABI (أبو سعيد): Abu Said defines tala as a drink cooked until two-thirds evaporate; the name reflects its dark thickness like camel ointment. WAHIDI-BASIT (ثعلب): Thaʿlab transmits that khāmir can mean one who conceals testimony; the root sense is covering, also reflected in the Prophetic instruction to cover vessels. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The phrase في الدنيا والآخرة may attach to تتفكرون, so people reflect on matters of both abodes and choose what is more enduring and beneficial. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A further construction attaches the phrase to يبين: God clarifies signs about both abodes and their concerns so people may reflect. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The signs are explained so people may reflect on the proofs and legal rulings. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The reported argument says a preponderance of harm over benefit entails that the act is prohibited. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Tafakkur is turning thought over a matter; fikr is the mind. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A cited poet calls wine “sin,” because drinking it makes the drinker lose reason; the usage reflects the sin associated with it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another explanation is that reflection concerns God’s commands and prohibitions, leading to obedience in this life and reward in the next. BIQAI-FULL (الحرالي): Al-Ḥarālī takes the phrase as preparing people for reflection, the soul's hand for grasping knowledge as the body's hand grasps sensible things. BURSEVI (author): Thinking about both abodes means choosing what is better and easier in this life, what benefits in the next, and avoiding what harms one there. ALUSI-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the verse is not explicit proof of prohibition: “sin” can mean harm, and a preponderance of harm alone establishes preference, not a ban; Companions drank until the al-Māʾida prohibition. | mentions 5:90, 5:91 ALUSI-FULL (author): Contemplating the signs means deriving rulings and understanding the interests and benefits attached to them; this makes reflection a fitting aim of their clarification. ELMALILI (author): God explains legal signs and proofs so people may reflect, understand their purposes, and act on them. TABATABAI (author): The reports explain one another, and experience and reflection confirm them."}, {"id": "2:219/q33/p3", "position": "Reflect on earthly needs and afterlife benefit, retaining necessary means and giving the surplus.", "reasons": "THALABI (المفضل بن سلمة): Al-Mufaddal says people should reflect on worldly and afterlife needs, keep enough wealth for earthly livelihood, and spend the remainder for their afterlife. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Thus points to the explanation of spending: just as He explained al-ʿafw, God clarifies signs so people reflect and know the afterlife is superior. JISHUMI (author): One interpretation urges people to consider worldly and afterlife needs, keeping enough for livelihood and spending the rest for the hereafter. BAGHAWI-FULL (قيل): One view says the signs about spending prompt people to reserve what sustains worldly life and give the remainder for the afterlife. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): “Thus God makes the signs clear” refers to the preceding discussions of wine, gambling, and spending; the signs guide believers to reflect on worldly and afterlife matters as a path to salvation. RAZI-FULL (author): The verse also invites reflection on giving wealth for the afterlife versus retaining it for worldly life, which should again yield preference for the afterlife. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (المفضل بن سلمة): Al-Mufaḍḍal ibn Salama applies reflection to spending: retain enough for worldly livelihood and give the rest for the afterlife. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Asked what to spend, believers are told to give whatever is easy for them to part with; this reflects that religion imposes no undue hardship. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): God explains the signs as He has clarified wine, gambling, and spending, so that reflection on this world and the next may lead people to prefer the afterlife. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The matter fit for reflection is the rule on wine and gambling linked to its causes, followed by the related spending instruction."}, {"id": "2:219/q33/p4", "position": "Reflection extends broadly to creation, society, ethics, and the human good.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Another interpretation contrasts the world's passing nature and mixed troubles with the lasting, unalloyed hereafter, urging obedience and avoidance of sin. QURTUBI-FULL (author): One explanation says keep enough wealth for worldly livelihood and spend the rest for the next life; another takes the syntax as inverted and urges reflection on the world's passing nature and the afterlife's permanence. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathir points back to the many early reports on reflection and taking lessons that he cited under the verse about signs in creation in Al Imran. | mentions 3:190 BURSEVI (البغوي): Al-Baghawī says to reflect on the world's passing nature and renounce it, and on the Hereafter's permanence and turn toward it. ELMALILI (author): For the legal question of drinking, all intoxicants count as hamr in the broad sense; chemically, fermentation gives intoxicants a shared wine-like nature, reflected in the word alcohol. TABATABAI (author): The invitation to reflection encompasses realities of existence, God and return, nature, society, ethics, and individual and communal life, namely all knowledge tied to human happiness and misery."}]}
{"id": "2:219/q34", "question": "How does the verse connect to nearby spending questions
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
