<<chunk 44, part 5 of 0..5>>
 d. 548 (author): Al-Tabrisi prefers intercourse: the verse already addresses the junub when water is present and must state the junub’s rule when absent as well as the rule for one who relieved himself. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن مسعود وابن عمر والشعبي والنخعي والشافعي): Ibn Masʿūd, Ibn ʿUmar, al-Shaʿbī, al-Nakhaʿī, and al-Shāfiʿī understand the phrase as skin contact, with or without intercourse. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās explains that God is modest and noble and uses euphemism, calling sexual intimacy ‘touching.’ QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Against the claim that Ibn ʿAbbas interpreted mulamasa as intercourse, al-Qurtubi notes that ʿUmar, his son, and Ibn Masʿud opposed it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): In the cited poetic usage, junub means a stranger; janāba also denotes a man's intercourse with a woman. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Alternatively, the phrase means sexual intercourse; lamasa is less commonly used as a euphemism for intercourse than mulāmasa. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (علي وابن عباس والحسن ومجاهد وقتادة): ʿAlī, Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Ḥasan, Mujāhid, and Qatāda interpret the phrase as intercourse, in which case a junub may use tayammum. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī takes لمس النساء as intercourse resulting in janāba, following the Ḥanafī school, and reports no other school's view. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn Kathir says Ibn Abbas’s intercourse interpretation is soundly transmitted through multiple routes. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas explains lamastum as intercourse, saying that God may use whatever euphemism He wills; Sa‘id ibn Jubayr reports Ibn Abbas’s response to the disagreement between Arab and non-Arab groups. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda says the contact means what is short of intercourse. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الشعبي): Al-Shabi says the contact means what is short of intercourse. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الحسن): Al-Hasan interprets the contact as sexual intercourse. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (علي وابن عباس والحسن): ʿAli, Ibn ʿAbbas, and al-Hasan are cited for the intercourse reading, which indicates major impurity. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعض المحققين): Some investigators say mutual bodily contact by any body part is the literal meaning, which includes intercourse; it is metaphor only when intercourse alone is intended. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Ibn Ashur prefers the euphemistic sense of intercourse: the list gathers common causes of minor and major purification, and the concession context calls for explicit mention rather than relying on implication. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): Junub describes the state after sexual intercourse; from janaba, “to make remote,” it denotes distance from prayer due to immersion in sexual passion. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The synonymous word mess is also used for intercourse in 2:236–237. | mentions 2:236, 2:237 QIRAAT-ER (Ḥanafī): The Ḥanafī view takes Form III mutual engagement as a euphemism for intercourse. MUJAHID (source note MUJAHID:v1p158/r3) supports this position. MUQATIL (source note MUQATIL:4:43/r8) supports this position. MAJAZ (source note MAJAZ:v1p128/r3) supports this position. IBNABIHATIM (source note IBNABIHATIM:v3p961/r1) supports this position. THALABI (source note THALABI:v3p314/r3) supports this position. THALABI (source note THALABI:v3p314/r4) supports this position. MAWARDI-FULL (source note MAWARDI-FULL:v1p490/r2) supports this position."}, {"id": "4:43/q19/p3", "position": "A touch related sense", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Touching and mutual touch have the same meaning, since one cannot touch a woman without her touching him. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الشافعي ومحمد بن عبد الحكم): Al-Shafiʿi and Muhammad b. ʿAbd al-Hakam count anything from either outlet, even if unusual, and include touching. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Junub may derive from distance, since one is apart from purity, or from the side, since one lies with or touches another by his side. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): جنب derives from جنابة, ‘distance’; a person is so called either for being distant from purity or for lying beside and touching another. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): The phrase is recited in two forms: lamastum and lamastum (with the long vowel). Exegetes and jurists differ over its meaning. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): The cited wording about touching women, with references to 4:43 and 5:6, is another example attached to the preceding discussion of literal and figurative usage. | mentions 4:43, 5:6 DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud also glosses touching women as ghamz, pressing or squeezing. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Variants such as yathurna/yattahharna and lamastum/lamastum increase the possible meanings of a verse. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (حمزة والكسائي وخلف): Most readers recite lāmastum with an alif; Hamza, al-Kisaʾi, and Khalaf recite lamastum without one. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): After intending tayammum, one touches clean soil, clay, sand, or stone with the palms, wipes the face, touches again, then wipes arms to the elbows. QIRAAT-ER (Ḥamza and Kisāʾī): Ḥamza and Kisāʾī read Form I lamasa instead of Form III lāmasa, removing the reciprocal morpheme and indicating one-sided touching. STUDYQURAN (legal scholars): Legal scholars hold that major ritual impurity also prohibits touching or reciting the Quran."}, {"id": "4:43/q19/p4", "position": "Bodily touch short of intercourse", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (عمر بن الخطاب وابن مسعود والشعبي وعطاء): Another interpretation takes it as touching a woman by hand or otherwise; al-Shafiʿi adopts this view. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Touch first referred to the hand and then broadened beyond literal contact; iltamas means to seek. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (ابن مسعود، ابن عمر، الشعبي، عبيدة، عطاء، ابن سيرين، النخعي، النهدي، الحكم، حماد): Another legal interpretation takes the phrase as touching a woman with the hand. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو علي): Abū ʿAlī says touch can mean contact by hand but is extended to other kinds of contact; 72:8 uses “we touched the heaven” for attempting to reach its secrets. | mentions 72:8 IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (أبو علي): The wording “they touched it with their hands” in 6:7 specifies hands to distinguish literal touching from the extended sense; likewise “sons from your loins” in 4:23 distinguishes biological sons from merely named sons. | mentions 6:7, 4:23 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The Maliki nullifiers fall into three kinds; Hanafis count impure bodily emissions regardless of outlet but exclude touching. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (عائشة): When ʿUrwa asked which wife the Prophet kissed, ʿAisha laughed, leaving open that she herself was the one. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الدارقطني): The kiss report used by Abu Hanifa is mursal: Daraqutni notes that Habib b. Abi Thabit did not hear from ʿUrwa, as Yahya b. Saʿid says Sufyan al-Thawri maintained. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (عائشة): Aisha reports that while searching for the Prophet at night in the mosque, her hand touched the soles of his feet as he prayed in prostration. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Scholars agree that tayammum does not remove major or minor ritual impurity; finding water restores the person to the prior state, based on the Prophet's instruction to Abu Dharr to let water touch his skin. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو عمر): Abū ʿUmar says no regional jurists adopted the hand-touch view, citing reports about tayammum for a junub from ʿAmmār, Abū Dharr, and ʿImrān ibn Ḥuṣayn. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): An unattributed poem uses ‘I touched the palm of his hand’ to illustrate the physical-touch sense of the verb. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (أبو ذر): The Prophet says clean earth purifies a Muslim even after ten years without water; once water is available, the person should let it touch the skin. Al-Tirmidhi grades the report hasan sahih, and Ibn Hibban authenticates it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (حماد): Hammad says anything touched by one's hands counts as saʿid, even dust from a saddle pad, and may be used for tayammum. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (أبو عثمان): Abu Uthman interprets the contact as touching by hand. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الجلال المحلي والكمال ابن أبي شريف): Al-Jalal al-Mahalli calls touching by hand literal; Ibn Abi Sharif says this exemplifies one kind of touch rather than defining the full literal meaning. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Touching earth with the hands evokes purification because earth is the source of water and is also used to clean vessels, garments, bodies, and through istijmar; it reminds the waterless person to seek water once able. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): Tayammum is performed by touching earth or a dust-bearing substance with the palms, then lightly wiping the face and hands. QIRAAT-ER (Shāfiʿī): The Shāfiʿī view takes Form I as one-sided touching, so any skin contact breaks wuḍūʾ."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
