<<chunk 44, part 1 of 0..5>>
 mean illness harmed by water, such as smallpox or fever, as in Ibn ʿAbbas's report. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (العلماء): Other jurists restrict illness to conditions such as smallpox, measles, or dangerous ailments where water may harm; they agree tayammum is allowed when harm is feared. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو حنيفة ومالك): Abū Ḥanīfa and Mālik permit tayammum when one fears illness will begin or worsen, or recovery will be delayed. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): Illness permits tayammum when using water risks losing or damaging a limb, or prolonging recovery. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud says the sick allowed tayammum include the broken and wounded; when junub, they should not wash a wound if doing so risks harm. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud says the patient allowed dry ablution includes a person with a fracture or wound; if he becomes junub, he should not wash an injury when that risks harm. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas, in a report raised to the Prophet, says a person with a wound, ulcers, or smallpox who fears washing while junub may use dry ablution. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The verse's unrestricted wording appears to allow every sick person dry ablution, but other verses exclude those whose illness will not worsen; legal works detail the rule. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Not finding water can figuratively mean that water exists but cannot be used because of need, fear, or harm; such circumstances are more common for travelers and the sick."}, {"id": "4:43/q14/p3", "position": "Fear of death or loss of limb", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (القاضي أبو يعلى): Qāḍī Abū Yaʿlā says illness allows tayammum when using water would cause harm, whether or not death is feared; travel allows it with no water on short or long journeys. Lack of water is not required for the ill, but harm is; it is required for travelers, while travel itself is not a condition because water is commonly absent on journeys. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن وعطاء): Severe illness that risks death from water or loss of a limb permits tayammum by consensus; al-Hasan and ʿAtaʾ dissent, but al-Qurtubi rejects their view by the no-hardship and no-self-killing verses. | mentions 22:78, 4:29 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Al-Qurtubi answers that if fear of death from cold permits tayammum, fear of illness should also suffice, since both illness and death are harms. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو نصر عبد الرحيم القشيري): Al-Qushayri gives the sound Shafiʿi position: fear of death or losing a limb permits tayammum, and the sound view also permits it to avoid prolonged illness. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Since the Prophet allowed travelling ʿAmr to use tayammum when bathing risked death, a sick person is even more entitled to it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): A report raised to the Prophet applies the tayammum concession to a person with war wounds, sores, or smallpox who fears bathing would kill him. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The verse gives three illness levels: water would cause death; it would cause severe pain, worsen or prolong illness; or it would leave only a feared blemish or bodily defect. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The established Hanafi rule permits dry ablution when using water is expected to worsen illness, whether worsening comes from movement or water itself; fear of death is not required. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (جمهور العلماء): All other jurists reject Umar and Ibn Masud's restriction; the majority allow tayammum for lack of water or fear that washing will cause death, illness, or worsening, even a cold or fever. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi permits tayammum only for lack of water or fear of death, reasoning that worsening illness is uncertain; Ibn Ashur replies that both outcomes are uncertain and God imposes no hardship."}, {"id": "4:43/q14/p4", "position": "Inability to obtain or handle water", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): The condition covers sick people and travelers: a traveler lacks water, while a sick person may have no one to wash him or fear harm from water. TABRISI, d. 548 (الحسن وابن زيد): Another view permits it when illness makes someone unable to handle water and no one can bring it; Hasan did not allow an injured person to use tayammum. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Illness counts when no one can hand over water or its use is feared harmful; a healthy resident may also lack usable water through widespread exorbitant prices, imprisonment, or restraint. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says a sick person without anyone to bring water, who cannot reach it and has no helper, may perform tayammum and pray."}, {"id": "4:43/q14/p5", "position": "Any illness qualifies", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (داود): Dāwūd applies the general wording of illness without limits on severity or duration and allows tayammum to anyone who fits the name sick."}]}
{"id": "4:43/q15", "question": "What journeys qualify for tayammum?", "turns_on": "The cited interpretations, reports, language arguments, and legal evidence differ.", "positions": [{"id": "4:43/q15/p1", "position": "Travel when water is unavailable", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (فرقة): Another group disallows tayammum during sinful travel; Ibn ʿAṭiyya also judges this weak. IBNATIYYA-FULL, d. 542 (author): A traveler may lack water because none exists, searching risks missing companions, baggage is endangered, or predators or other harm threaten. TABRISI, d. 548 (علي وابن عباس وسعيد بن جبير ومجاهد): One interpretation forbids prayer in janaba except for travelers, who may pray using tayammum even though it does not remove janaba. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (أصحاب الشافعي): They argue the travel and water ruling follows as a separate rule: readers prefer pausing at ‘until you wash,’ so the earlier exception should not depend on the later verse’s condition. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): A traveler who lacks water must use tayammum whether the journey is long or short. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Scholars agree tayammum is allowed while travelling, but disagree about residence: Malik, his followers, Abu Hanifa, and Muhammad allow it there too. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar reportedly would not leave his travel route to seek water even when it lay two bowshots away; Ishaq says one need search only where one is. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): A traveler may tayammum if water is entirely or partly unavailable, or seeking it risks losing companions or baggage, encountering thieves or beasts, missing prayer time, or causing thirst to oneself or another; cooking necessary food also counts. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو سعيد الخدري): In the report of Abu Said, two travelers pray after tayammum; the Prophet says the one who does not repeat followed the Sunna and the one who repeats earns double reward. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (أبو داود): Abu Dawud transmits the two-traveler report and notes that the Abu Said link is not preserved in other narrations; al-Daraqutni's version specifies finding water within the prayer time. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قتادة): Asked about travel tayammum, Qatada reports Ibn Umar’s elbow limit; al-Hasan and Ibrahim al-Nakha‘i also held it. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The traveler is excused when water is unavailable. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): The exception attaches to “while junub,” exempting travel when water is unavailable and tayammum is used, as the following clause indicates. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (أبو حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa allows tayammum for someone who leaves town without intending travel if water is a mile away; another view sets the distance where people's voices cannot be heard. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): Travel permits tayammum whether the journey is long or short. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عمار بن ياسر): Ammar ibn Yasir reports that after he became junub while traveling and rolled in dust, the Prophet taught him that tayammum requires only striking the earth and wiping the face and palms. SUYUTI-LUBAB, d. 911 (علي): ʿAlī says the clause about being ritually impure except when passing through concerns a traveler who became impure, performed dry ablution, and prayed. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): A traveler excused by travel may pray using dry ablution while junub; the prohibition lasts until washing. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الهداية): Al-Hidaya allows tayammum for someone without water who is traveling or at least a mile outside town. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Abirin sabil means people traveling on the road or in a state of travel; the exception concerns tayammum. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The failure to find water is attached to the conditional clause and limits the traveler, one coming from the privy, and one touching women. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Although the verse later explicitly refers to travelers, this interpretation says the phrase is repeated because water is less available or more needed during travel. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Scholars agree tayammum is permissible during travel when water is absent or an obstacle prevents its use. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The commentary reads this verse as stating the tayammum substitute during travel and 5:6 as stating it for residents. | mentions 5:6 STUDYQURAN (the Prophet’s wife ʿĀʾishah): The verse reportedly followed ʿĀʾishah losing a necklace while traveling with the Prophet. The group camped to search, lacked water, complained they could not wash, and the verse came at dawn prayer. MAJAZ (source note MAJAZ:v1p128/r1) supports this position. THALABI (source note THALABI:v3p319#2/r1) supports this position. THALABI (source note THALABI:v3p319#2/r2) supports this position. MAWARDI-FULL (source note MAWARDI-FULL:v1p489/r12) supports this position. MAWARDI-FULL (source note MAWARDI-FULL:v1p489/r13) supports this position. MAWARDI-FULL (source note MAWARDI-FULL:v1p489/r14) supports this position. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (source note WAHIDI-WAJIZ:4:43-44/r7) supports this position. JISHUMI (source note JISHUMI:v2p1567/r12
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
