<<chunk 53, part 4 of 0..5>>
 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The pronoun may be understood to include every fruit-bearing thing mentioned earlier, including palms; referring distributively to either item alone is unlikely because its antecedent would be unclear. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The second “then” elaborates the general bringing-forth; min may be partitive or indicate origin, its pronoun refers to vegetation, and the phrase divides the genus into kinds. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The pronoun's antecedent is all the items mentioned, but its singular form directs attention to each item individually; a word meaning ripening is elided after the reference to ripening."}, {"id": "6:99/q07/p2", "position": "The first 'from it' refers to water", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The pronoun refers to the water. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The pronoun may refer either to the plant or to the water. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو البقاء: If منه refers to water, Abu al-Baqa treats the second فأخرجنا clause as a semantic replacement; al-Samin says strict grammatical بدل is not evident and prefers coordination. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Al-Samin corrects the Shaykh: Abu al-Baqa’s بدل analysis depends on منه referring to water and cannot be attributed to the plant reading. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Another permitted reading returns the pronoun to water and takes من causally: the water produces the green growth. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting أبو البقاء: On the reading where منه refers to water, he parses the clause as an appositional substitute for the first أخرجنا. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting بعض المحققين: If the pronoun refers to water, the verse highlights how sweet water, white to the eye, yields plants and fruit with diverse tastes and colors; a rain poem illustrates the image."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q08", "question": "What is the green growth?", "turns_on": "Whether the term stresses color, tender freshness, or grain crops.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q08/p1", "position": "Khaḍir is fresh green grain crop or tender shoot", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. AKHFASH: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. ZAJJAJ: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. NAHHAS: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. MAWARDI-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. WAHIDI-BASIT: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. WAHIDI-BASIT: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. JISHUMI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. BAGHAWI-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. KASHSHAF-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. TABRISI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. TABRISI: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. RAZI-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. RAZI-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. RAZI-FULL: Because 6:95 distinguishes grain from pits, Razi identifies green growth here with grain crops. RAZI-FULL: Khaḍir denotes fresh green growth or green crops. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The grain stacked in layers is grain growing from the green shoot, namely an ear of grain. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الليث: Al-Layth says خضر means crops in the Qur'an, but in ordinary speech it can mean any green plant. ELMALILI, d. 1361: His rendering describes rain bringing out every kind of vegetation, then green growth and stacked grain, hanging date clusters, grape gardens, olives, and pomegranates; it invites observing fruit from first growth to ripeness. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Khudr can mean something green or, as intended here, moist nonwoody growth such as young fodder and tender shoots, since grain grows from it."}, {"id": "6:99/q08/p2", "position": "Khaḍir means green growth", "reasons": "TABRISI: Water is only a means of growth; God could grow plants without it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjaj takes خضر as meaning green: the analogy is أخضر/خضر as أعور/عور. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: نخرج may be an adjectival clause describing خضرا or an independent report. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو إسحاق: Abu Ishaq says خضر and أخضر both mean green, like عور and أعور. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: On either reading, the clause is most naturally an adjective of خضرا, though it may be independent. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: جنات may instead coordinate with خضرا. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The imperfect verb can vividly present the remarkable scene; alternatively the clause is an independent sentence describing what comes from the green shoot. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الواحدي: Al-Wahidi coordinates وجنات with خضرا. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He cites a hadith describing spring growth as sometimes killing through overeating, except for the creature that eats greenery until its flanks extend; he gives no grading. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: “We bring forth from it” is an adjectival clause for khudran, which has become a noun; min is connective or originative, with its pronoun returning to khudran. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The date-palm clause is coordinated to “then We brought forth green growth,” though it may be parenthetical with an interrupting wāw; “from the palms” is the fronted predicate and “clusters” the delayed subject. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Khidr means green and may be a shortened form of khāḍir."}, {"id": "6:99/q08/p3", "position": "Khaḍir emphasizes tender freshness", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Al-khaḍr is fresh green vegetable growth. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: Khadr is fresh green growth branching from the plant's base, and may be said as akhḍar or khaḍir. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: خضرا means fresh, lush, and tender, here emerging from the plant. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The green growth is tender, fresh plant matter branching from the plant's root, itself arising from the seed. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Khiḍr means green: the fresh green growth that branches from the plant emerging from a seed. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: خضر means green, like أعور/عور, and here denotes a tender green shoot branching from the root of a plant grown from seed."}, {"id": "6:99/q08/p4", "position": "Green also has figurative senses of blackness or freshness", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting غيره: Another view derives خضر from freshness, not color; calling the world green is a metaphor for freshness, while actual greenness denotes color. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Green lies between white and black but closer to black; thus black can denote green and vice versa, as in سواد العراق for its tree-covered greenness. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting النبي: The Prophet explains خضراء الدمن as a beautiful woman from a bad upbringing; الدمن are refuse heaps where attractive plants may grow. ALUSI-FULL: Green is nearer black than white, so Arabic uses black and green for one another."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q09", "question": "How is the grain-producing clause read and construed?", "turns_on": "The active or passive reading and whether the clause modifies the green growth.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q09/p1", "position": "The second production clause is coordinated or explanatory", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The clause about bringing forth grain has a grammatical or reading analysis. RAZI-FULL: The clause about bringing forth grain has a grammatical or reading analysis. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting أبو البقاء: The second فأخرجنا may be coordinated with the first, while Abu al-Baqa also allows it to be an appositional replacement for the first. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya parses an implied نخرج من النخل and makes the following sentence its object; the author rejects this because the verb takes one object and nothing licenses a clausal object here. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting ابن عطية: Ibn ʿAtiyya links من النخل to an omitted verb and makes من طلعها قنوان a nominal clause functioning as the object of نخرج. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الشيخ: A verb taking one object cannot take a whole clause unless it licenses clausal complements and a blocker prevents governance within it; نخرج has neither condition. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The clause describes khiḍr; grain is brought forth from that branching green growth."}, {"id": "6:99/q09/p2", "position": "The present verb vividly shows ongoing production", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: مدهامتان in 55:64 means intensely black because of the gardens’ abundant moisture and greenness. | mentions 55:64 ELMALILI, d. 1361: The tense and growth imagery also hints that Islam at the verse's Meccan revelation was like grass or a bud, while the Quran was heavenly mercy and believers' future would resemble mature gardens and fruit. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412: Although the following sequence uses present tense, the sentence is in past tense, obliquely pointing to life's original creation from water, as in 21:30. | mentions 21:30 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: اشتباه is resemblance so intense that it causes confusion; تشابه can be limited to one aspect and need not reach confusion. | mentions 6:141 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The verse negates both confusion and similarity; denying resemblance also rules out the stronger confusion, while the following verse uses the less intense تشابه wording. | mentions 6:141"}, {"id": "6:99/q09/p3", "position": "A variant has third-person 'grain comes forth'", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الأعمش وابن محيصن: Al-Aʿmash and Ibn Muhaysin read يخرج منه حب متراكب, with حب governed in the nominative by يخرج and متراكب agreeing as its adjective. ABUHAYY
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
