<<chunk 53, part 5 of 0..5>>
AN-FULL, d. 745: With the variant يخرج منه حب, the palm phrase may coordinate with that verb, as in parallel clauses, or stand independently as a subject-predicate sentence, the better analysis. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الشيخ: With passive يخرج, the palm clause may coordinate with the passive clause; the Shaykh prefers the alternative topic-predicate parse. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: A reading has the passive third-person form يخرج منه حب متراكب. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: With the prior reading يخرج منه, قنوان can be coordinated with حب."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q10", "question": "What is the stacked grain?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q10/p1", "position": "Grains are stacked in an ear, one above another", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. MAWARDI-FULL: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. WAHIDI-BASIT: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. BAGHAWI-FULL: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. KASHSHAF-FULL: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. TABRISI: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. TABRISI: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. RAZI-FULL: The grain is stacked in layers in an ear. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: The stacked grain is piled one part upon another, as in an ear of grain. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The clustered grain is the ear in which the grains are stacked together. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Tarakub describes one thing mounted or piled upon another. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The apparent sense is every kind of plant in Arabic: growing grains, fruits, vegetables, grasses, and trees; كل شيء means everything that grows. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: ذلكم points to everything just mentioned, from splitting grain and pit through all God created and bestowed. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The sequence follows the earlier mention of splitting grain: vegetation is followed by stacked grain, then dates from their pits. | mentions 6:95 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: متراكبا can be nominative or accusative as an adjective of حب, following the two case parses. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Having emphasized that God alone brings forth grain, the passage turns from grain to the date palm and its kernel. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The account from splitting dawn onward elaborates the earlier statement that God splits grain and kernels, establishing power, oneness, and resurrection before returning to denounce idolatry. | mentions 6:95, 6:96 BURSEVI, d. 1127: The stacked grain refers to an ear of grain, whose kernels are arranged one above another in a particular form. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The grain is stacked one above another, as in an ear of grain. ELMALILI, d. 1361: The close-packed grain ears resemble cavalry companies lined for battle, their spears extended against an attack from the air. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ḥabb is the plant's fruit, including wheat, barley, and all cultivated grains. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Mutarākib means grains attached one upon another in an ear; its reciprocal pattern intensifies their piling together. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The circumstantial phrase may instead apply to everything mentioned from the piled grain onward, since all those things are alike in some respects and unlike in others. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The grains are described as stacked one above another, as in an ear of grain."}, {"id": "6:99/q10/p2", "position": "The grains are protected by husks and bristles", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Fine sharp bristles above ears protect stacked grains from birds. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Grain grows in overlapping ears, protected from birds by husks and fine, long, rough bristles; from a single seed or scattered earth it passes through stages, proving a sovereign Creator."}, {"id": "6:99/q10/p3", "position": "Layering includes other packed seeds as well as ears", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: From the greenery God brings stacked grains such as wheat, barley, and legumes, and layered seeds in fruits such as pomegranates and pine nuts."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q11", "question": "Why are crops and the named trees given in this order?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q11/p1", "position": "Grain comes first as staple nourishment", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Grain precedes trees because food comes before fruit. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Crops precede trees because grain is nourishment, fruit a delicacy, and nourishment comes first. ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Razi explains the order: staple grain precedes tree fruits because food comes before delicacies; date palms then precede other fruits because dates are Arab staple food and philosophers see many animal-like qualities in the palm. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Grain illustrates a specific form of providence after the general one; it is mentioned first because it is commonly needed and can be stored, prompting reflection on a wise and powerful Creator."}, {"id": "6:99/q11/p2", "position": "The palm precedes other fruits as an Arab staple", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Palms precede fruit trees because dates are Arab staples and palms resemble animals. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The palm is singled out from the general plant account to emphasize a great favor, since dates were among the Arabs' principal foods. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Date palms precede other fruits because they serve Arabs as a staple comparable to nourishment. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The generic definite article marks the familiar date palm, the Arabs' characteristic tree whose fruit was their staple and whose groves delighted them."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
