<<chunk 53, part 3 of 0..5>>
ople and remove Satan’s defilement. | mentions 8:11"}]}
{"id": "6:99/q05", "question": "Why does the speech shift to 'We brought forth'?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q05/p1", "position": "The first-person plural is iltifāt and the plural of majesty", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The shift to We brought forth uses a majestic first-person plural. RAZI-FULL: The shift to We brought forth uses a majestic first-person plural. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The shift to the first-person plural is a change in the mode of address. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The shift from third-person reference to first-person plural in فأخرجنا is an iltifat, using the majestic plural. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الجمهور وابن محيصن والأعمش: The majority read نخرج active in first-person plural; Ibn Muhaysin and al-Aʿmash read passive يخرج, with حب as its agent. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: فأخرجنا shifts from third-person reference to the first-person plural of majesty. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The shift from speaking of God in the third person to 'We brought forth' uses the plural of majesty, not a plural of number. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الجبائي: Al-Jubbaʾi says philosophers require pre-existing matter because they regard bodies as eternal and change as merely a shift in qualities; Muslims instead hold that bodies are created and God freely creates as He wills. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Its fruit means the fruit of the olive and pomegranate trees; the verse shifts usage because those names earlier denoted the fruit itself. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الفراء: Al-Farra instead takes the earlier words as referring to olive and pomegranate trees, so no shift in usage is needed. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The verse shifts from third-person reference to first-person plural in “We brought forth,” an instance of iltifāt."}, {"id": "6:99/q05/p2", "position": "The shift stresses divine care and the grandeur of creation", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The clause is coordinated with أنزل; the shift to God's first-person plural stresses the care given to the purpose for which water was sent. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting بعضهم: A further explanation says the earlier mention of God as creator prompts direct address, and the majestic plural underscores divine care despite the water's singularity. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The move to God's first-person speech expresses care and sovereignty over heaven, earth, air, and clouds."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q06", "question": "What is meant by the vegetation of every thing?", "turns_on": "The scope of 'every thing': botanical kinds, each creature's food, or all growth.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q06/p1", "position": "Growth means food or provision suited to each creature", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. FARRA: Al-Farra prefers that God brings forth food suitable for each creature. TAB-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. NAHHAS: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. MAWARDI-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. MAWARDI-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. WAHIDI-BASIT: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. WAHIDI-BASIT: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. KASHSHAF-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. TABRISI: Water grows food for animals and people; Tabarsi prefers this over all plant varieties. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. RAZI-FULL: The water brings forth vegetation or provision for every kind. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Nabat kull shayʾ means every kind of plant; another explanation is provision for every animal. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الفراء: Al-Farra says نبات means sustenance suitable as food for everything; on this reading كل شيء is restricted to what is nourished. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: On this parse, the palm clause is parenthetical and formed as a topic-predicate sentence to magnify the blessing of dates, a major Arab food combining enjoyment and sustenance. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الفراء: Al-Farra interprets the phrase as the provision or food suitable to nourish each thing, restricting it to what feeds. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: On al-Farra’s food/provision reading, the annexation joins distinct things: the food or provision of every thing. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Common usage narrows النبات to stemless plants, often those eaten by animals, while considered in its full sense it includes every growing plant, animal, or human. TABATABAI, d. 1402: On the cited explanation, water brings forth plant growth in everything capable of growth, unfolding from latency to manifestation; this includes plants, trees, humans, and other animals."}, {"id": "6:99/q06/p2", "position": "The phrase means every kind of plant", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari prefers vegetation as what grows by water and is sustained by it. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari also allows all kinds of plants, but judges the preceding interpretation correct. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Vineyards coordinate with 'the growth of every kind'; Nāfiʿ reads them nominative as a new subject with an implied predicate, but they cannot coordinate with palm clusters because grapes do not grow from palms. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: This means the growth of every kind of plant and displays God's power in producing diverse varieties watered by one water, as in the cited description of crops watered by one water yet differing in taste. | mentions 13:4 NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The water brings forth every kind of growing thing: one cause produces many different kinds of result. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: With jannāt in the accusative, it is coordinated with نبات كل شيء: God also brings forth vineyards by the water. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: One interpretation takes نبات كل شيء to mean everything linguistically called a plant. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: The water brings forth every kind of plant; Ibn Kathir relates this to the statement that every living thing was made from water. | mentions 21:30 BURSEVI, d. 1127: The rain produces plants such as wheat, barley, pomegranate, and apple; 'every thing' is restricted to what grows, not stones or other non-growing things. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Nabt and nabat mean growth from the earth, whether a woody tree with a trunk or a plant without one. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Gardens of grapes are coordinated with the phrase نبات كل شيء. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الراغب: Nabat is growth that emerges from earth, whether it has a trunk like a tree or not like grass. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting بعض: Some take النبات here in the broader first sense of all growth from earth. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting افلاطون: Plato posits such immaterial lights for every kind of celestial body, element, and compound; al-Qunawi's commentary on the Fatiha suggests a similar view. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The gardens are coordinated with نبات كل شيء: water brings forth gardens of grapes. ELMALILI, d. 1361: At every thing’s origin and each moment of its development, signs of God’s lordship and proofs of power and unity are evident to scholars, the learned, and all who can believe. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Nabāt names what grows; originally a verbal noun of nabata, it became a common figurative name for the growing plant and now also denotes the source noun itself. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The kinds include crops with soft stems, trees with thick stems such as palms and grapes, and low-growing herbage that lies against the soil."}, {"id": "6:99/q06/p3", "position": "Growth includes all growing beings", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL: Al-Tabari includes animals, plants, minerals and all growth nourished by rain. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari takes plant of everything to include all growing animals, plants, minerals, and other things, since they feed and grow through rain. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari includes all growing things among animals, plants, and minerals, since all are nourished by water."}, {"id": "6:99/q06/p4", "position": "The annexation joins vegetation with every kind", "reasons": "FARRA: The annexation can instead mean all varieties of vegetation, like haqq al-yaqin. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الفراء: Al-Farra also allows نبات to be annexed to كل شيء while intending كل شيء as نبات, like حق اليقين; al-Samin notes this additional view was omitted by the Shaykh. | mentions 56:95 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: “Each thing” means each plant species, as the annexation indicates; the clause means that water brings forth all kinds of vegetation."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q07", "question": "What does the first 'from it' refer to?", "turns_on": "Which earlier noun supplies the pronoun.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q07/p1", "position": "The first 'from it' refers to the vegetation", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The pronoun from it refers to water or plant growth. BAGHAWI-FULL: The bihi pronoun refers to water; the first minhu can refer to water or vegetation. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The pronoun from it refers to water or plant growth. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The pronoun from it refers to water or plant growth. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The pronoun from it refers to water or plant growth. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The pronoun from it refers to water or plant growth. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The apparent antecedent of منه is نبات; Zamakhshari gives only this option. من then marks part or point of origin. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو البقاء: Abu al-Baqa also allows منه to refer to ماء, with من expressing cause. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Some regard this phrase as the start of the detailed account of the general production; منه then refers to نبات.
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
