<<chunk 54, part 5 of 0..5>>
fruits are alike in some respects and unlike in others", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Abd al-Aziz ibn Yahya says looking means examining fruit as evidence and taking a lesson. BAGHAWI-FULL: Another view makes fruits similar in outward form yet different in taste. TABRISI: Tabarsi prefers an inclusive reading: fruits resemble in some features and differ in others. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Al-Zajjaj says some fruits are alike and others unlike. RAZI-FULL: Fruit can look alike and taste different, or look different while sharing flavor. RAZI-FULL: A single grape bunch can have ripe sweet berries beside green sour ones. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting الجوهري وغيره: Al-Jawhari and others note that the dual is sinwān and the plural sinwān, with differing case vowels. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Alternatively, مشتبهًا may describe the earlier olive by precedence, with the estimate that both olive and pomegranate are similar and dissimilar. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: These dialects retain waw in the singular and never use ya there, so the plural unexpectedly differs from the singular stem. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الراغب: Nasal قنا, the curvature of a nose, is named by resemblance in shape; a man is أقنى and a woman قنواء. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: On the non-Farra interpretation, the annexation resembles an adjective and described noun: نبات means المنبت, not a verbal noun as in 71:17. | mentions 71:17 BURHAN, d. 794: بدل is like repeating its governor and can represent two clauses; repeated prepositions demonstrate this, unlike an adjective construction. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Fruits and staples resemble and differ despite sharing water and soil, proving divine power and choice, supporting God's oneness and resurrection, and refuting partners who would need equal power in shared acts. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Mشتبه describes extreme likeness: fruit from separate trees can be so similar that one cannot distinguish which tree produced it. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The fruits differ in taste: some are very sour, some sweet, and some both sour and sweet. ELMALILI, d. 1361: The fruits' likeness and difference restate more plainly the rule of regularity and variation signaled earlier by settled and deposited states. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Compare a fruit when it first appears, still unripe, with its maturity: their difference displays nurture and a clear course of development, signs for believers of God's existence, unity, power, and providential wisdom. ELMALILI, d. 1361: Elmalılı takes pomegranate's contrasting dense parts and delicate juice as a clear example of the verse's rule that likeness and difference coexist. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The diversity invites people to consider the subtle different powers God deposited in plants that cause their varying conditions. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Their similarity and difference point to deliberate creation and choice rather than accident. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The pronoun in “its fruit” refers to the same specific or general referent as the pronoun in “alike.” TABATABAI, d. 1402: The fruits are similar or dissimilar in kind, shape, and other respects; yanuʿ means the fruit’s ripening. STUDYQURAN: Plants can resemble one another even when their produce differs greatly. STUDYQURAN: The resemblance and difference of produce evoke the interwoven oneness and multiplicity of creation."}, {"id": "6:99/q25/p3", "position": "Fruits look alike but differ in taste", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL: Al-Kalbi says fruits have similar colors but different tastes. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Ibn Abbas says fruits resemble in appearance but differ in taste. QURTUBI-FULL: Ibn Jurayj compares two same-colored pomegranates with different flavors. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The description may modify the pomegranate or all the fruits: some resemble one another and others differ in shape, size, color, and taste. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The fruits resemble or differ from one another in size, color, and taste. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting ابن جريج: Ibn Jurayj says they may look alike yet taste different, like two pomegranates with the same color but different flavors. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari allows similarity of fruit with different tastes, or similar taste with different appearance. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari says some fruits resemble others and some differ in size, color, or taste; their variety shows deliberate design rather than neglect. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: An omitted بعض is understood: some are alike and some unlike in appearance, size, color, taste, and other features, displaying their maker's power and wisdom. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412: The plants share basic principles of life and growth but differ in physiology, appearance, and taste. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Fruit varieties resemble and differ from one another in appearance, size, and taste, reflecting God's providence, mercy, power, wisdom, and generosity."}, {"id": "6:99/q25/p4", "position": "Members of one kind resemble, unlike different kinds", "reasons": "TABRISI: Al-Jubba'i says things of one kind resemble each other, but unlike kinds differ."}, {"id": "6:99/q25/p5", "position": "Peels and seeds resemble while flesh or juice differs", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Peels and seeds can resemble in taste and properties while flesh and moisture differ."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q26", "question": "What do the singular resemblance states modify?", "turns_on": "Which noun owns the singular circumstantial expression and what is understood.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q26/p1", "position": "The two circumstances apply jointly by understood ellipsis", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: The paired resemblance terms or their circumstantial syntax receive an explanation. KASHSHAF-FULL: The paired resemblance terms or their circumstantial syntax receive an explanation. RAZI-FULL: The paired resemblance terms or their circumstantial syntax receive an explanation. RAZI-FULL: The paired resemblance terms or their circumstantial syntax receive an explanation. RAZI-FULL: The singular circumstantial term may describe one item with an omitted repetition for both; a poem is cited. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Abū Ḥayyān rejects al-Zamakhsharī’s inference from the verse of poetry: بريئًا can describe singular, dual, or plural, whereas a dual circumstantial form would be required. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari instead applies both states to both olives and pomegranates, with omitted repeated predicates; he compares the ellipsis with 9:62 and a poetic line. | mentions 9:62 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The paired wording uses ellipsis by احتباك: the first term implies absence of likeness, while the second denies actively seeking likeness, rebutting claims that natural properties act independently. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The paired adjectives may be a circumstantial phrase for الزيتون, with the same understood for الرمان, or for الرمان with the same supplied for الزيتون. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Some allow the circumstantial phrase to apply to both nouns by supplying an interpretive adjustment. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The two expressions are coordinated circumstantial predicates, and the wāw marks division because one thing cannot be both alike and unlike; some are alike and some differ. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Both circumstantial expressions apply jointly to olives and pomegranates, and are singular because the grammatical wording is singular. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 reporting الزمخشري: He adopts this parse because he rejects one circumstantial phrase having multiple owners or a contest among them, and compares it with a singular predicate after a coordinated subject."}, {"id": "6:99/q26/p2", "position": "The singular circumstance attaches to the nearer pomegranate", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو البقاء: Abu al-Baqa says the state applies to the pomegranate and to all the fruits; that is semantically sound if ellipsis is understood, but not as literal syntactic agreement. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhsharī attaches the circumstantial phrase only to olives and supplies an understood parallel condition for pomegranates, “likewise.”"}]}
{"id": "6:99/q27", "question": "What variant reading uses 'mutashābih'?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q27/p1", "position": "A noncanonical reading uses mutashābihan in place of mushtabihan", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: This omitted-predicate pattern resembles the nominative reading وحور عين after the verse about being served a cup, and Sibawayh, al-Kisai, and al-Farra permit it. | mentions 56:22 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: A noncanonical reading has متشابها, with the same reciprocal sense as مشتبهًا; both forms express mutual resemblance, like اختصم/تخاصم. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الجمهور: The majority read singular مشتبها; an anomalous reading has متشابها وغير متشابه, with the same sense, since افتعال and تفاعل often share meanings. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الكشف: Al-Kashf says the predicate reading is unlikely to be al-Zamakhshari's intent and offers a response based on coordination with a restricted noun. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: A reading has متشابها in place of مشتبها."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
