<<chunk 54, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "6:99/q12", "question": "How is the palm-cluster clause construed?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q12/p1", "position": "Qinwān is a delayed subject after a fronted predicate", "reasons": "FARRA: Qinwan is nominative: from the palms there are near clusters. FARRA: An accusative qinwanan is possible in speech but barred by the written text. TAB-FULL: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. NAHHAS: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. KASHSHAF-FULL: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. RAZI-FULL: The palm clause has a subject-predicate or elliptical analysis. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Qinwān dāniya is parsed as subject and predicate; al-Farra allows a non-Qur'anic accusative qinwānan coordinated with what precedes. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The syntax may mean producing palms from palms, with bunches from their spathes, or producing bunches from palm spathes; alternatively min al-nakhl predicates qinwān and min ṭalʿihā is an appositive. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الطبري: Al-Tabari coordinates raised جنات with قنوان; Ibn Atiyya calls that weak, and Abu al-Baqa objects that grapes do not grow from palms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari offers coordination with قنوان if the phrase means palm clusters and grape gardens as two kinds of produce, without carrying over من النخل to the gardens. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الشيخ: The Shaykh calls the preceding grammatical account confused. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting ابن الأنباري: Ibn al-Anbari also allows coordination on قنوان by proximity: eyes follow brows though they are not plucked, just as grape gardens do not come from palm flowers; the author calls this defense weak and characteristic of adjectival attraction. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Coordination on قنوان is also possible if من النخل does not scope over the gardens: palm clusters and separately produced grape gardens; al-Tabari gives this analysis, Ibn ʿAtiyya weakens it, and Abu al-Baqa objects that grapes do not grow from palms. BURHAN, d. 794 reporting ابن عصفور: Ibn ʿAṣfūr rejects غلمانه as a valid example of this construction. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The discussion turns from herbaceous plants to trees, and the phrase is a fronted predicate. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: قنوان is the subject; the phrase means that clusters come from the spathes of the palms. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari allows coordinating the nominative gardens with قنوان. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting قيل: Another paraphrase supplies a verb: We bring out from the palms, from their spathes, clusters. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He allows an alternative circumstantial parse linked to the palm phrase, on the basis of lexical definiteness, by analogy with the later olive-and-pomegranate wording. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The clause marvels at the beautiful clusters emerging from the palm spathe; its position among the other clauses also conveys their lesson and blessing."}, {"id": "6:99/q12/p2", "position": "'From its spathe' is an apposition to 'from palms'", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The phrase is a subject-predicate sentence; ومن طلعها is an appositional specification of ومن النخل, yielding clusters from the palm's spathes. BURHAN, d. 794: Zarkashī sides with the majority: a بدل should add clarification absent from its base, often by mentioning a specific after a general. BURHAN, d. 794: Partitive بدل normally requires a pronoun referring back to the whole; the Qur'anic example from حج البيت omits it because another verse makes the referent clear. | mentions 3:97, 14:37 BURHAN, d. 794: بدل can transfer the predicate from its base to a related element, as in the people being described through most of them and Zayd through his garment."}, {"id": "6:99/q12/p3", "position": "The predicate is omitted and inferred from 'brought forth'", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الزمخشري: Al-Zamakhshari allows an omitted predicate, مخرجة, inferred from فأخرجنا; the author says the sentence needs no such addition. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Alternatively the predicate is omitted and supplied by أخرجنا; on this parse the prepositional phrase attaches to an implied particular production."}, {"id": "6:99/q12/p4", "position": "A prepositional phrase governs qinwān as subject", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting أبو البقاء: Abu al-Baqa offers parses making قنوان a subject or participial agent and supplying implicit pronouns; the author calls the analysis confused and unsuitable for Qur'anic parsing. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: A تنازع parse has both prepositional phrases seeking قنوان as subject: Basrans prefer the second governor and insert a pronoun in the first, Kufans the reverse. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الشيخ: If the verb governed a word inside the nominal clause, قنوان would have to be accusative as its object."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q13", "question": "What is the palm's ṭalʿ?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q13/p1", "position": "Ṭalʿ is the emerging spathe and its bloom", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Abu Ubayda says talʿ is the early unopened spathe and also the first visible cluster within it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Ṭalʿ is the palm spathe before it splits to reveal the bloom; the bloom is also called ṭalʿ, as is what appears on a palm cluster. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Ṭalʿ is the first growth emerging from a date palm within its sheaths; a palm is said to produce its ṭalʿ when it brings it out. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting أبو عبيد: Abu Ubayd says ṭalʿ is like the palm's sheath before it opens from the inner spadix, and the inner spadix itself is also called ṭalʿ. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: طلع is the first growth to emerge from the palm within its enclosing sheaths. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Min ṭalʿihā is an apposition repeating the preposition; the palm spathe resembles two folded sandals with fruit packed between them. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: “From its spathe” can be a partitive apposition to “the palms,” repeating the preposition used with the word it replaces."}, {"id": "6:99/q13/p2", "position": "Ṭalʿ is the palm's first fruit or cluster", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. BAGHAWI-FULL: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. TABRISI: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. TABRISI: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit. RAZI-FULL: Ṭalʿ is the first emerging palm spathe or fruit."}, {"id": "6:99/q13/p3", "position": "Ṭalʿ is the palm's earliest growth", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Best parse: من النخل is a fronted predicate, من طلعها a partitive بدل with repeated preposition, and قنوان a delayed topic; the nominal clause coordinates with the prior verbal clause. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: On al-Akhfash’s alternative, قنوان is raised as subject by من النخل, with من طلعها as apposition. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو البقاء: Abu al-Baqa’s other parse makes قنوان the subject governed by من طلعها, with a pronoun in من النخل; al-Samin assigns governance to the second phrase. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: A further parse makes قنوان a topic, من طلعها its predicate, and posits an understood شيء or ثمر with من النخل; al-Samin rejects it because the predicate cannot also be بدل. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: If من طلعها is already the predicate, it cannot also be بدل; taking من النخل as predicate repeats the earlier parse. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو عبيد: Abu ʿUbayd defines الطلع as the kafara before it splits from agrīḍ, also called طلع; أطلعت النخلة describes the palm producing it while طلع الطلع describes the growth’s emergence. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: An unnamed poem lists palm-fruit stages: طلع, خلال, بلح, بسر, رطب, then تمر. BURHAN, d. 794: In 6:99, طلعها is a بدل اشتمال of النخل, with من repeated as its governor. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The phrase من النخل is a fronted predicate, and من طلعها is a partitive apposition with the governing preposition repeated."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q14", "question": "What does qinwān mean and how is it formed?", "turns_on": "Whether qinwān names clusters, spathes, or palm heart.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q14/p1", "position": "Qinwān are date clusters, plural of qinw", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. AKHFASH: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. TAB-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. TAB-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. TAB-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. ZAJJAJ: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. ZAJJAJ: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNABIHATIM: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNABIHATIM: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNABIHATIM: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. MAWARDI-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. MAWARDI-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. WAHIDI-BASIT: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. WAHIDI-BASIT: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. WAHIDI-BASIT: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. WAHIDI-BASIT: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. BAGHAWI-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. KASHSHAF-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. IBN
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
