<<chunk 54, part 3 of 0..5>>
reporting محمد بن كعب: Muhammad ibn Ka'b glosses the fruit as fresh dates and grapes. ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Razi concludes that grapes deserve the title “sultan of fruits.” IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The names originally designate the fruits but here denote the trees, just as with grapes. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Grapes, olives, and pomegranates are named because they were common in Arabia; the point is that people received fruits as well as staple food."}, {"id": "6:99/q19/p3", "position": "A janna is a dense, concealing garden", "reasons": "BURSEVI, d. 1127: A dense growth that conceals parts of itself is called a jannah, from the root meaning concealment; aʿnāb is the plural of ʿinab, Persian angūr."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q20", "question": "How is 'gardens of grapes' read and construed?", "turns_on": "The case reading and which earlier word or implied clause governs gardens.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q20/p1", "position": "Nominative gardens begin an independent clause with an implied predicate", "reasons": "AKHFASH: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TAB-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TAB-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari rejects nominative gardens as distant from the correct sense and prefers reciters' accusative consensus. ZAJJAJ: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. NAHHAS: Al-Nahhas prefers the common accusative gardens but accepts nominative as a subject with omitted for them; Abu Ubayd and Abu Hatim reject nominative. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. WAHIDI-BASIT: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. WAHIDI-BASIT: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. WAHIDI-BASIT: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. WAHIDI-BASIT: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. JISHUMI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. JISHUMI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. BAGHAWI-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. BAGHAWI-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. KASHSHAF-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TABRISI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TABRISI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TABRISI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TABRISI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. TABRISI: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. RAZI-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. RAZI-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. QURTUBI-FULL: The gardens have an accusative or nominative reading with syntactic explanations. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting محمد بن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى والأعمش: Ibn Abi Layla and al-A'mash, in the sound reading of Asim, read jannāt in the nominative; Abu Ubayd and Abu Hatim reject it, with Abu Hatim objecting that gardens cannot be of palms. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting النحاس: Al-Nahhas accepts the nominative as a subject with an omitted predicate, “and they have gardens,” a construction allowed by Sibawayh, al-Kisa'i, and al-Farra. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 reporting الأعمش: Al-Aʿmash reads jannāt in the nominative, implying: and there are also gardens of grapes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting محمد بن أبي ليلى والأعمش وأبو بكر: Muhammad ibn Abi Layla, al-Aʿmash, and Abu Bakr in one transmission from Asim read جنات in the nominative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting أبو عبيد وأبو حاتم: Abu Ubayd and Abu Hatim reject the nominative reading, with Abu Hatim arguing that grape gardens cannot be from date palms; the author says the reading has valid Arabic analyses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting النحاس وابن عطية وأبو البقاء والزمخشري: One grammatical analysis takes raised جنات as a subject with an omitted predicate such as لهم, لكم, من الكرم, or ثم. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Al-Aʿmash, Muhammad ibn Abi Layla, and Abu Bakr in a report from ʿAsim read وجنات in the nominative. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: As a nominative subject with omitted predicate, al-Zamakhshari supplies ثم, while Abu al-Baqa supplies من الكرم, matching ومن النخل. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: من أعناب is an adjectival phrase modifying جنات; it is nominative with the nominative reading and accusative with the other reading, and depends on an omitted element. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting علي كرم الله تعالى وجهه وابن مسعود والأعمش ويحيى بن يعمر وأبو بكر عن عاصم: These readers have وجنات in the nominative, with an implied لكم, ثم, or similar expression."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p2", "position": "Accusative gardens coordinate with general vegetation", "reasons": "FARRA: Jannat is accusative with a kasra marking the feminine plural object. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الجمهور: The majority read جنات in the accusative and coordinate it with نبات: this is a distinguished specific item after the general category, with palms and vineyards singled out for their honor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: That coordination is possible if the palm restriction is not applied to both nouns: clusters come from palms and gardens from grapes, like paired people from different tribes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Another parse delays the omitted predicate: gardens of grapes are brought forth, inferred from the earlier فأخرجنا, just as a predicate can be omitted after a parallel clause. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الجمهور: The majority read جنات accusative, coordinating it with نبات: the water brings forth plants generally and gardens specifically. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Al-Nahhas estimates ولهم and Ibn ʿAtiyya ولكم; the omitted-predicate construction also parallels وحور عين, whose understood predicate is لهم, and is accepted by Sibawayh, al-Kisaʾi, and al-Farraʾ. | mentions 56:22 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: A delayed omitted predicate can be أخرجناها, inferred from the earlier فأخرجنا; Ibn al-Anbari had already analyzed the phrase this way. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Al-Farazdaq's line raises الخمر although it is the object, understood as والخمر أحلها الطعنة, illustrating delayed coordination with an omitted predicate. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: All readers have الزيتون and الرمان in the accusative; they may coordinate with جنات or with نبات, as al-Zamakhshari and Abu al-Baqa explain. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: If نبات has its broad sense, gardens are already included and cannot naturally be coordinated with it; if it means stemless plants, gardens are outside it, and a new verb must be supplied for palms. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting التقريب: Al-Taqrib objects that treating من أعناب as an adjective yields gardens from palms made from grapes, while making it a predicate leaves an indefinite subject coordinated with a singular. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The apparent parse starts a new clause with an implied production phrase; the elaborate alternative is needless, while gardens are explicitly plural because their benefit usually requires a group of vines. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Olives and pomegranates are accusative, coordinated with the gardens; their definite articles are generic, as with the date palms."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p3", "position": "Nominative gardens coordinate with qinwān", "reasons": "FARRA: Nominative gardens may coordinate with qinwan. TAB-FULL: Al-A'mash reports nominative gardens coordinated with qinwan. NAHHAS: Nominative gardens begin a clause with omitted for them, not coordinated with palms; Sibawayh, al-Kisai and al-Farra allow it. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ibn al-Anbari parses nominative gardens with omitted verb or coordination with qinwan by proximity. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Majority read accusative gardens; a report from Abu Bakr has nominative with implicit for you; al-Tabari coordinates with qinwan. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Atiyya rejects al-Tabari's coordination of raised gardens with qinwan as weak."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p4", "position": "Accusative gardens mark prized kinds as a special specification", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL: Al-Zamakhshari prefers accusative specification for special fruits, though coordination with plant growth is possible. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الزمخشري: Zamakhshari prefers taking accusative جنات as اختصاص, singling out these kinds like والمقيمي الصلاة; al-Samin says his wording implies he treats nominative as famous and accusative as anomalous. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The accusative can mark specification, highlighting these prized kinds, or coordinate them with نبات. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: “Of grapes” is a genitive explanatory specification, since gardens are measured by their grapevines; this explains why the verse says gardens rather than grapes in gardens."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p5", "position": "An omitted verb brings forth the gardens", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: In the phrase about vineyards, Ibn Kathir supplies the omitted verb: We bring forth vineyards from it. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Verbs are omitted in both linked clauses about dates and orchards; the first omitted verb is passive and the second active."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p6", "position": "Accusative gardens coordinate with green 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
