<<chunk 54, part 4 of 0..5>>
growth", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT: Al-Wahidi prefers accusative gardens coordinated with green growth as the object of We brought forth."}, {"id": "6:99/q20/p7", "position": "Accusative gardens coordinate with the grain", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting الطيبي: Al-Tibi considers coordination with حبا more apparent: the general plant category is then elaborated by its grains and other growth."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q21", "question": "Why are these fruits and trees singled out?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q21/p1", "position": "Grapes are singled out for their many useful stages and products", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Palms and grape gardens are singled out together as especially prized, as in the verse describing a garden of palms and grapes. | mentions 2:266 BURSEVI, d. 1127: The verse specifies grape gardens rather than merely naming the species because grapes are generally useful when many plants grow together. ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Razi says grape seeds are especially valuable and that physicians prepare remedies from them for weak, damp stomachs; contemporary doctors agree when seeds are chewed and crushed."}, {"id": "6:99/q21/p2", "position": "The examples represent the wider variety of God's provision", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities. RAZI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities. RAZI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities. RAZI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities. RAZI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities. QURTUBI-FULL: The listed fruits are selected for their prominence, uses or illustrative qualities."}, {"id": "6:99/q21/p3", "position": "Olives are named for food and useful oil", "reasons": "ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Razi notes that olives are eaten and their oil has extensive benefits and uses in food and other matters. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Olives grew in Syria and Sinai, while pomegranates grew in al-Ṭāʾif."}, {"id": "6:99/q21/p4", "position": "Pomegranate displays useful contrasting parts", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Pomegranate is singled out for its mixture of rind, pith, seed, and juice: the first three are cold, dry, dense, and astringent, while its juice has opposite qualities. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Pomegranate is last for its beauty and great benefit: rind, pith, and seeds are cold, dry, earthy, and astringent, while its juice is opposite, agreeable, near balance, and both food and medicine."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q22", "question": "What do olive and pomegranate denote here?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q22/p1", "position": "Olive and pomegranate denote their trees", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ: Olive and pomegranate are paired because their leaves cover branches from end to end. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: The wording includes olives and pomegranates along with the date palms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الزجاج: Al-Zajjāj says olive and pomegranate are paired because Arabs know both trees have leaves extending along the branch from end to end; a poem illustrates the pairing. BURSEVI, d. 1127: God also brought forth olive trees and pomegranate trees."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q23", "question": "How are olive and pomegranate construed?", "turns_on": "Which earlier object governs the accusatives or whether they mark specification.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q23/p1", "position": "Olive and pomegranate are accusative objects coordinated with gardens", "reasons": "FARRA: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. TAB-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. TAB-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. ZAJJAJ: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. NAHHAS: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. WAHIDI-BASIT: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. WAHIDI-BASIT: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. BAGHAWI-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. TABRISI: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. RAZI-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. QURTUBI-FULL: Olive and pomegranate refer to their trees or are coordinated accusatives. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الجمهور: The accusative reading of الزيتون والرمان is unanimous. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: مشتبها may be a circumstantial accusative describing the pomegranate because it is nearest, with the matching circumstance omitted after the olive. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: مشتبها is a circumstantial accusative most naturally referring to the nearer الرمان, with an omitted matching state for الزيتون; resemblance concerns color and difference concerns taste."}, {"id": "6:99/q23/p2", "position": "The accusatives specify prized olive and pomegranate", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Olives and pomegranates either coordinate with the plant growth or are accusatives of specification, because these two types were prized among the audience. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting ابن عطية والزمخشري: Ibn Atiyya coordinates الزيتون والرمان with حبا or نبات; al-Zamakhshari also allows coordination with نبات, but prefers accusative اختصاص because the two kinds are especially eminent."}, {"id": "6:99/q23/p3", "position": "The accusatives coordinate with the grain", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Ibn ʿAtiyya instead coordinates these two nouns with حبا; a later conjunct may attach either to the immediately preceding item or to the first item in the series."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q24", "question": "How are the names olive and pomegranate formed?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q24/p1", "position": "Zaytūn follows the fayʿūl pattern, distinct from zayt", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: زيتون is on the pattern فيعول like قيصوم, supported by أرض زتنة and the rarity of فعلول; its root differs from زيت. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: زيتون follows the pattern فيعول, with ت extra and ن original, supported by زتنة for land rich in olives and by the pattern قيصوم; فعلول is absent or rare. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: زيت and زيتون are distinct roots despite oil being extracted from olives; زات الطعام means adding oil, زات الرأس means anointing it, and ازدات reflects ت changing to د after ز."}, {"id": "6:99/q24/p2", "position": "Rummān follows the faʿāl pattern with original nūn", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: رمان has the pattern فعال with original ن, like عناب and حماض; رمنة describes land rich in pomegranates."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q25", "question": "What is alike and unlike in the plants and fruits?", "turns_on": "The features compared: foliage, appearance, taste, species, or parts of fruit.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q25/p1", "position": "Leaves resemble, while fruits differ", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. MUQATIL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. TAB-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. TAB-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. ZAJJAJ: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. IBNABIHATIM: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. MAWARDI-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. WAHIDI-BASIT: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. BAGHAWI-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. TABRISI: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. TABRISI: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. TABRISI: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Qatada says leaves resemble while fruits differ. RAZI-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. RAZI-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. QURTUBI-FULL: Plants, leaves or fruits resemble in some respects and differ in others. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting قتادة: Qatadah says these plants resemble one another in their leaves but differ in their fruit. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 reporting قتادة وغيره: Qatada and others say the plants resemble one another in their leaves and general appearance but differ in fruit shape, taste, and nature. DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting قتادة: Qatada says the plants resemble one another in their leaves but differ in their fruits. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The olive and pomegranate foliage resembles one another and covers the branches from beginning to end. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The Persian gloss likewise takes the trees' leaves as similar and their fruits as different in taste."}, {"id": "6:99/q25/p2", "position": "Plants and 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
