<<chunk 54, part 1 of 0..5>>
JAWZI-ZAD: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. RAZI-FULL: Qinwān means clusters of dates, plural of qinw. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Qinwān is plural of qinw, and its dual is qinwān like sinw/sinwān; qinw means a date cluster. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Qinwān and aqnāʾ are plurals of qinw; a cited line describes palms as having long aqnāʾ, a small-count plural. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671: Qinw means a date cluster; ʿidhq with kasra means the cluster, while ʿadhq with fatḥa means the palm tree. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting سيبويه والفراء: Sibawayh notes qinwān; al-Farra assigns it to Qays and the Hijaz, while Tamim says qiniyān, though their singular is qinw/qan. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Qinwān are palm clusters, the plural of qinw, like ṣinwān as the plural of ṣinw. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: A قنو is a palm cluster or bunch, also called الكباسة; the term can denote the cluster's stalk. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الواحدي: Al-Wahidi compares the new final ḍamma to the distinction between منصور and the vocative حار in يا حار. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: قنوان is the broken plural of قنو, like صنوان from صنو; قنو is a date cluster or stalk, also called كباسة. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Imruʾ al-Qays uses قنو النخلة المتعثكل in a foliage simile and elsewhere uses قنوانا for red dates. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Other distinctions include dual alif changing to ya in oblique cases and its nun dropping in annexation, while plural nun remains; dual nisba drops its markers but plural قنواني retains them. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Though قنوان and صنوان resemble sound masculine plurals, broken pattern فعلان itself conveys plurality rather than two added markers. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: In pause, dual and plural قنوان are homonyms; in connected speech, case marking distinguishes them. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الراغب: Al-Raghib also derives قناة from قاناه, ‘mixed it’; Imruʾ al-Qays’s مقاناة البياض بصفرة supports mixture. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 reporting ابن جرير: Ibn Jarir says qinwān is the plural of qinw; Hijaz and Qays use qinwān, while Tamim says qinyān, just as sinw has plural sinwān. Imruʾ al-Qays’s verse witnesses qinwān. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: طلع is the palm's first growth within its sheaths; قنوان is plural of قنو, a bunch or cluster, and دانية means within easy reach despite the tall trunk. DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting البراء بن عازب: Al-Bara says qinwān dāniya means near clusters. DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting ابن عباس: Another Ibn Abbas gloss calls qinwān the palm clusters and dāniya the upright ones. DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting قتادة: Qatada defines qinwān as palm clusters and dāniya as hanging down. ITQAN, d. 911: Qinwān dāniya means short palm clusters whose roots cling close to the earth. ITQAN, d. 911 reporting ابن خالويه: Ibn Khalawayh says only قنوان and صنوان share the same form for plural and dual, with one further non-Qur'anic form. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Qinwān is the plural of qinw, a palm fruit cluster analogous to a grape cluster. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: قنوان is the plural of قنو, a date cluster, corresponding to a grape cluster; its dual and plural forms are distinguished by inflection. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting ابن خالويه: Ibn Khalawayh says قنوان, صنوان, and رئدان are among the few nouns whose dual and plural forms coincide; al-Suyuti's al-Muzhir also transmits Sibawayh's parallel forms. TABATABAI, d. 1402: Ṭalʿ is the first fruit appearing on a date palm; qinwān is the plural of qinw, a date cluster like a grape cluster, and dāniya means near. NASAFI-FULL: Qinwan is the plural of qinw, a date cluster, like sinw and sinwan. ITQAN: Qinwan is the plural of qinw."}, {"id": "6:99/q14/p2", "position": "Qinw denotes the palm heart", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL: A second interpretation takes qinwan as the palm heart, jummar. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting القرطبي: Al-Qurtubi transmits another sense for قنو: the palm heart, الجمار. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The view that قنو means a palm’s heart or pith is nearly mistaken: the pith is inside the palm, unlike the nearby fruit; the established meaning is a cluster."}, {"id": "6:99/q14/p3", "position": "Related q-n-w words describe shape, channels or property", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ, d. 1419 reporting أبو موسى والزمخشري: For the hadith forbidding slaughter of qini sheep, Abu Musa says they are kept for milk and offspring; al-Zamakhshari defines qinya as livestock kept as property."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q15", "question": "How is qinwān read across dialects?", "turns_on": "The qāf vowel and whether the form is a plural or collective.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q15/p1", "position": "The common reading is qinwān with kasra", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. NAHHAS: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The qāf of qinwān has variant vowels or dialect forms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The few plural is أقناء and the many plural قنوان; dialects vary between قاف vowels and replacing the plural's واو with ياء, while the singular remains قنو. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الجمهور: The majority read قنوان with kasra on قاف. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الزمخشري: Zamakhshari makes قنوان a topic with its predicate omitted and inferred from أخرجنا; the Shaykh and al-Samin find this unnecessary because the clause already informs independently. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو علي: Abu ʿAli says the plural’s kasra replaces rather than preserves the singular kasra of قنو, as in هجان and ظراف."}, {"id": "6:99/q15/p2", "position": "Qanwān with fatḥa is a collective noun", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting ابن هرمز: Ibn Harmuz read qinwān with fatḥa on qāf, also reported with ḍamma; fatḥa is a collective noun, while ḍamma makes it a plural of qinw. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting سيبويه: With fatḥa qinwān is a collective noun, not a broken plural, like rakb, al-bāqir, and al-jāmil; with ḍamma it is plural of qinw. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Qinwān is read with ḍamma on qāf, by analogy with dhiʾb/dhuʾbān, and with fatḥa as a collective noun, since fiʿlān is not a plural pattern. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الأعرج وهارون عن أبي عمرو: In another transmission al-Aʿraj and Harun from Abu Amr read قنوان with fatḥa on قاف; Abu al-Fath parses it as a collective noun on فعلان. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو عمرو: A third form, قنوان with qaf fatḥa, is Abu ʿAmr’s reading in Harun’s transmission. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting ابن جني: Ibn Jinni parses the fatḥa form as a collective noun, not a plural, since Arabic has no plural pattern فعلان SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الزمخشري وأبو البقاء: Zamakhshari compares it with ركب, Abu al-Baqa with الباقر; al-Durr prefers الباقر because it is uncontroversially collective while ركب is disputed by Abu al-Hasan. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The fatḥa form’s analysis is supported because the singular is attested with qaf kasra or ḍamma, never fatḥa. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The قاف is read with either damma or fatha; the fatha form is a collective noun because فعْلان is not a broken-plural pattern."}, {"id": "6:99/q15/p3", "position": "Qunwān with ḍamma is a dialectal plural", "reasons": "JISHUMI: Common qinwan has qāf kasra; al-A'raj reads ḍamma as another dialect. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الأعمش والخفاف عن أبي عمرو والأعرج: Al-Aʿmash, al-Khaffaf transmitting from Abu Amr, and al-Aʿraj in one transmission read قنوان with damma on قاف; al-Sulami transmits this from Ali. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya's book reports al-Aʿraj reading قنوان with damma as the plural of قنو with damma. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting تميم وربيعة: Two further dialectal forms use ya rather than waw: قنيان with qaf ḍamma or kasra; both are Tamim and Rabiʿa forms."}, {"id": "6:99/q15/p4", "position": "Dual and plural qinwān share form but differ in inflection", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو عبيد: Abu ʿUbayd says the dual of قنو is قنوان with kasra on nun and the plural matches it, like صنو/صنوان, an otherwise unmatched form."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q16", "question": "In what sense are the clusters near?", "turns_on": "Whether nearness concerns reach, height, drooping, density, or uprightness.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q16/p1", "position": "The clusters hang downward", "reasons": "MUQATIL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. ABDURRAZZAQ: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. ABDURRAZZAQ: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. TAB-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. TAB-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. TAB-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. TAB-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. ZAJJAJ: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. IBNABIHATIM: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. MAWARDI-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. BAGHAWI-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. BAGHAWI-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachable, low or drooping clusters. BAGHAWI-FULL: Dāniya describes near, reachabl
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
