<<chunk 55, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "6:99/q28", "question": "Why are two different resemblance forms used?", "turns_on": "Whether the two verb forms are synonyms or differ in intensity.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q28/p1", "position": "The two verb forms have overlapping meanings", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: Iftʿāl and tafaʿul forms often share a meaning, as in the verbs for resembling; olives and pomegranates are each alike in some respects and unlike in others. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Tashābuh and ishtibāh are synonymous, both derived from shabah. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Similarity means matching in one feature while differing in others; plants or fruits may resemble or differ in the colors, tastes, or forms people seek according to their varying preferences. ALUSI-FULL: The iftiʿal and tafaʿul forms both mean resemblance."}, {"id": "6:99/q28/p2", "position": "Mushtabih signals stronger, confusing resemblance than mutashābih", "reasons": "SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The 6:99 wording highlights God's power through confusing resemblance, while 6:141 uses ordinary similarity in a passage about food; denying similarity also rules out confusion. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: Mشتبه describes such strong resemblance that things become confusing or indistinguishable; متشابه can describe similarity in one respect without confusion. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: Making distinct things so alike that they become confused is a stronger sign of divine power, so مشتبه suits the verse's call to contemplate that power. | mentions 6:141 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The author says غير متشابه fully denies resemblance, which also excludes confusion; saying غير مشتبه would leave open some resemblance. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: مشتبه is the stronger term and better signals God's power, fitting 6:99's invitation to inspect and contemplate the fruit. | mentions 6:141"}, {"id": "6:99/q28/p3", "position": "The paired synonyms vary sound without changing sense", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The paired synonyms vary the expression to avoid repetition; the final form also makes a more fitting stopping point through its extended sound."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q29", "question": "What does the command to look require?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q29/p1", "position": "Observe fruit from its first formation through ripeness", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. FARRA: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. WAHIDI-BASIT: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. WAHIDI-BASIT: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. TABRISI: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. RAZI-FULL: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. RAZI-FULL: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. QURTUBI-FULL: The command calls for reflecting on fruit from first formation to ripeness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Look with the eyes, as إلى indicates; the sight leads to reflection and inference about God’s power in changing fruit through its stages. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: إذا أثمر is a time adverb for انظروا, either purely temporal or conditional with an omitted or advanced response: when it fruits, look at it. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Diverse kinds arising from one source and changing through ordered stages require a knowing creator who selects what wisdom favors, unhindered by rival or opponent. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The command asks for reflective observation of the fruit's stages."}, {"id": "6:99/q29/p2", "position": "Look with reflection and inference from the visible fruit", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The fruit to observe is the fruit of each of the plants just mentioned. ITQAN, d. 911: Other imperative functions include bringing something into being, recalling blessing, challenging a false claim, consultation, reflection, and amazement; al-Sakkaki treats the last as performative used for report. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The signs refer to the phenomena people were told to observe; they prove the existence and oneness of the almighty, wise Creator, and believers are named because they benefit from the inference. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The command is to look with reflective consideration. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The command is to look reflectively and with insight. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The statement that these contain signs gives the reason for the command to observe; in here functions like the causal lām, as in a line by Bashshār. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The command to look explains the preceding descriptions, which aim to bring people to knowledge of God's creation and power. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The purpose of 6:99 is to display God's power through the growth and fruit, inviting people to look and reflect; its conclusion identifies signs for believers. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: انظروا إلى ثمره calls for reflection and contemplation, whereas كلوا من ثمره is a command to eat. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT: The first verse ends by inviting contemplation of God's power; the second follows eating instructions with a warning against excess."}, {"id": "6:99/q29/p3", "position": "The command obliges displaying fruit for inspection", "reasons": "DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting محمد مسعر: Muhammad Mas'ar says people are obligated, when fruits appear, to bring them out and look at them, citing this command."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q30", "question": "Whose fruit is meant?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q30/p1", "position": "Thamar means the produce of fruit trees", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM: Fruit refers to the produce of the named trees. QURTUBI-FULL: Fruit refers to the produce of the named trees. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The forms ينع, الينع, and الينوع vary by dialect and mean that fruit has ripened and matured; أينه also means it ripened. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: إلى ثمره depends on انظروا, which means to look with reflection; إلى is used because this sense includes contemplation. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الفراء: Al-Farraʾ says أينعت means the fruit turned red; the hadith phrase compares a red-born child to الينعة, a red bead said to be carnelian or a kind of it. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The demonstrative refers to what people were commanded to inspect; its distance form carries the nuance explained elsewhere. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Idhā marks the time when the event begins, so this means the onset of fruiting. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Thamar means the produce yielded by a tree."}, {"id": "6:99/q30/p2", "position": "The singular pronoun distributes over all the mentioned plants", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: ثمر can include what grows on the tree, while calling the tree itself ثمر is figurative. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: ينعه refers to ripening or the ripe state, when the fruit becomes large, useful, and fully pleasurable; the word originally names ripening."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q31", "question": "How is the word for fruit read and analyzed?", "turns_on": "The vowel reading and the noun or plural pattern assigned to it.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q31/p1", "position": "Thumur has ḍamma on both consonants", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Meccan and most Kufan readers use ḍamma on both consonants of thumur. TAB-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TAB-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TAB-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TAB-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TAB-FULL: Al-Tabari prefers ḍamma because the verse gathers grain, dates, grapes, olives and pomegranates as multiple forms of produce. TAB-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. ZAJJAJ: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNMUJAHID: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNMUJAHID: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNMUJAHID: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. NAHHAS: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. FARISI-HUJJA: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. FARISI-HUJJA: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. THALABI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. THALABI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. MAWARDI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. MAWARDI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. MAWARDI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. WAHIDI-BASIT: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. JISHUMI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. JISHUMI:
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
