<<chunk 55, part 4 of 0..5>>
eir diverse and conflicting effects toward a common purpose. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Since God provides for every human need, His grace also requires spiritual nourishment in the form of guidance, which is why prophets are needed. STUDYQURAN: The signs in creation point to God’s Oneness, Power, and Wisdom. STUDYQURAN: The verse evokes God’s power to produce multiplicity from singularity, as He creates many human beings from one soul. | mentions 6:98, 4:1 IBNKATHIR-FULL: Reflect on the Creator's power in plants emerging from nothingness and acquiring many shapes, colors, tastes, and scents."}, {"id": "6:99/q43/p3", "position": "The signs show divine mercy, wisdom and providence", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774: These fruits are signs of the Creator’s perfect power, wisdom, and mercy for people who believe in Him and follow His messengers. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The rain passage recalls another immense blessing that shows God’s power and the breadth of His mercy. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Dates were a staple Arab fruit, and the verse traces their development from tree and buds to heavy hanging clusters so people can witness God's creativity and infer His power, wisdom, mercy, and providence. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The world could have survived in a plain, monotonous form, but its myriad petals and flowers were made to disclose God's power, wisdom, mercy, and providence so people could know Him. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Nature did not need its many marvels to survive; the Creator made every petal and flower display divine power, wisdom, mercy, and providence so people could understand Him. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: A universe so full of power, knowledge, and wisdom is not purposeless amusement; its moral order entails a day when God's perfect justice and absolute mercy appear."}, {"id": "6:99/q43/p4", "position": "The signs demand gratitude and worship of God alone", "reasons": "ITQAN, d. 911: The account of abundant provision, crops, and fruits ends “for people who believe,” since recognizing these blessings should lead to faith and gratitude. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Some enjoy God's provisions as if they existed only for food and comfort, never asking what responsibility they owe their provider or whether they will answer for these favors. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The benefits God placed in the universe require gratitude, worship, and obedience to Him alone, followed by accountability, reward for the grateful, and punishment for the ungrateful."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q44", "question": "How does this verse connect with nearby and parallel verses?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q44/p1", "position": "It connects with other Qurʾanic accounts of water and produce", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: The passage connects this image with neighboring verses or similar Qurʾanic passages. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: رمان follows فعال like حماض and عناب, not فعلان, as shown by the expression أرض رمنة. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Olive follows for its use as food and its highly beneficial oil for eating, lighting, and other uses. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting أبو عمرو: Abu ʿAmr reads the Kahf occurrence with ḍamma and a still م; that is eloquent, though consistency would suggest using it here too, since recitation follows transmission. | mentions 18:34 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: Olive follows because it has many uses, yielding valuable oil for food, light, and other applications. BURSEVI, d. 1127: The verse now unpacks the general statement about bringing forth: it first describes tender growth from plants without trunks. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: For some, the verse now begins detailing trees after detailing stemless plants. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The فاء marks consequence, with the sequence understood according to the time appropriate to each thing. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The fāʾ in “then He brought forth by it every plant” marks consequence or elaboration. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Ibn ʿĀshūr quotes al-Azraq ibn Ṭarafa al-Bāhilī's line in which a singular predicate follows a subject and its conjunct, as an example relevant to the parse. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The order of growth is readily grasped by ordinary understanding when free from stubbornness; celestial arrangements require specialist knowledge, while human creation calls for theoretical inquiry and deep inward scrutiny. BINTSHATI-IJAZ, d. 1419: Aqna is unique in form and root in the Qur'an; the related w-root appears in qinwan in 6:99. | mentions 6:99 STUDYQURAN: Earthly fruits and the fruits of Paradise are symbolically analogous or comparable. | mentions 2:25 STUDYQURAN: Those who believe are implicitly linked with those who know in verse 97 and understand in verse 98. | mentions 6:97, 6:98 STUDYQURAN: Verses 95–99 discuss God as giver of life and death in this world and the next."}, {"id": "6:99/q44/p2", "position": "It parallels 13:4's diversity from one water", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The phrase means every plant kind, whose quantity, quality, properties, and effects vary in degree, as another verse describes. | mentions 13:4 IBNASHUR-FULL: The diversity from one water recalls 13:4, where plants share water yet differ in food. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He relates the comparison of plant varieties to 13:4, which notes that some are favored over others in food. | mentions 13:4 STUDYQURAN: The variety of fruit produced by the same water invites wonder. | mentions 13:4"}, {"id": "6:99/q44/p3", "position": "It expands 6:95–98's account of life, grain and creation", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: An argument for grain's superiority from its earlier mention is reported; al-Jahiz wrote on it. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The restrictive form “He is the one who sent down” follows the same explanation as the corresponding wording in the preceding verse. | mentions 6:98 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: He links this wording to the earlier Qur'anic phrase about a downpour from the sky in al-Baqara. | mentions 2:19"}]}
{"id": "6:99/q45", "question": "How is the plant sequence read inwardly?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q45/p1", "position": "The botanical sequence maps knowledge, virtues, deeds and spiritual states", "reasons": "QASHANI, d. 736: Rain from the spirit’s heaven is the water of knowledge, which brings forth every class of moral quality and virtue. QASHANI, d. 736: These are signs for those with knowledge-based faith who affirm the enumerated signs and spiritual states. QASHANI, d. 736: The green growth is the soul’s fresh, verdant form, beautified and gladdened by knowledge and character. QASHANI, d. 736: The grains are ordered, noble, accepted deeds and sincere intentions that strengthen the heart. QASHANI, d. 736: The date palm is the intellect; as its attachments emerge, it yields accessible knowledge and truths made nearly self-evident by spirit-light. QASHANI, d. 736: Grape gardens signify spiritual states and tastes, especially kinds of heart-love whose juice and pure wine intoxicate. QASHANI, d. 736: Olives represent reflection, while pomegranates represent true conjectures, lofty aspirations, and precious resolve. QASHANI, d. 736: Some fruits resemble one another, like intellectual reflection, knowledge, deeds, intentions, or love of essence and attributes; others differ, including kinds of love and their ranks, strength, and visibility. QASHANI, d. 736: During the path and the beginning of a spiritual state, one should watch its fruit through vigilant self-observation and turn attention from pleasures toward these fruits. QASHANI, d. 736: Ripening signifies perfection at arrival through spiritual presence."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q46", "question": "What Arabic ellipses and analogies support the verse's constructions?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q46/p1", "position": "Arabic permits contextually understood omissions and concise constructions", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. SIBAWAYH: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. ZAJJAJ: Al-Zajjaj derives ma' from mah; hamza replaced faint ha, as plural amwah and miyah and diminutive muwayh show. ZAJJAJ: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. NAHHAS: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The source supplies a grammatical or lexical comparison relevant to this verse. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: ماء is the accusative direct object of أنزل, with the indirect object phrase من السماء preceding it."}]}
{"id": "6:122/q01", "question": "How is the opening «أَوَمَن» read and parsed?", "turns_on": "The conjunction after the interrogative hamza is read as waw, quiescent waw, or faʾ; grammarians also differ over the implied coordinate clause.", "positions": [{"id": "6:122/q01/p1", "position": "The majority read awaman with a voiced waw: an interrogative hamza precedes a conjunction.", "reasons": "Al-Naḥḥās, al-Ṭabrisī, al-Qurṭubī, Ibn ʿAṭiyya and al-Samīn parse hamza before the conjunctive waw; al-Ṭabrisī calls it a questi
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
