<<chunk 55, part 3 of 0..5>>
s on buyer; Prophetic remission report is unestablished to him."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q39", "question": "How much crop loss triggers remission?", "turns_on": "Whether every loss or a third by quantity or value qualifies.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q39/p1", "position": "Remission begins when a third of the crop quantity is lost", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting مالك وأصحابه: Malik and his school require a disaster to destroy at least a third of the crop; smaller loss is disregarded as incidental because every crop has minor inaccessible or spoiled portions."}, {"id": "6:99/q39/p2", "position": "Remission begins when a third of the crop's value is lost", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting أصبغ وأشهب: Asbagh and Ashhab assess the crop's value rather than its quantity, remitting payment when the value lost reaches a third."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q40", "question": "What damage counts as a crop disaster?", "turns_on": "Whether the loss must be unavoidable, which causes qualify, and whether vegetables are covered.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q40/p1", "position": "Only unavoidable loss counts as a crop disaster", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Ibn al-Qasim defines disaster as unavoidable damage, excluding theft, though another report from him counts theft and his companions oppose it."}, {"id": "6:99/q40/p2", "position": "Unpreventable natural damage counts as a crop disaster", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Mutarrif and Ibn al-Majishun count natural rot, hail, drought, heat and nonhuman tree damage; Ibn al-Qasim specifically counts drought."}, {"id": "6:99/q40/p3", "position": "Vegetables qualify for crop disaster remission", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Al-Qurtubi prefers applying crop disaster remission to vegetables as to fruit."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q41", "question": "What ruling is noted about wine among grape products?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q41/p1", "position": "Wine is forbidden despite grape products' other benefits", "reasons": "ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Although wine is forbidden by Islamic law, Razi cites the Quran's judgment that its sin outweighs its benefit. | mentions 2:219"}]}
{"id": "6:99/q42", "question": "Who are the people who believe and why are they named?", "turns_on": "Whether they already believe, seek faith, or are destined to benefit.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q42/p1", "position": "Already believing people are singled out because they benefit from the signs", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Believers benefit from the signs or the phrase identifies those addressed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Believers benefit from the signs or the phrase identifies those addressed. RAZI-FULL: Only believers are named because they benefit from the signs, as 2:2 names the mindful. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: These remarkable transformations are signs of the Maker's power and choice; believers renew their faith whenever they reflect on God's works, while signs do not benefit the doomed. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Alternatively, these are already believers; they alone are specified because they benefit from the signs. TABATABAI, d. 1402: The verse pairs each kind of sign with a capacity: stars address people who know, human creation those who understand deeply, and the growing system those who believe. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: Recognizing an evident fact requires a sincere intent to accept it; people generally go astray through deficient intent rather than deficient knowledge. STUDYQURAN: Believers alone benefit from these signs by recognizing proofs of Divine Power and Oneness; disbelievers cannot grasp them. | mentions"}, {"id": "6:99/q42/p2", "position": "Only those decreed to believe benefit", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Razi says only those decreed to believe benefit from signs; others do not. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The signs demonstrate God’s perfect power, workmanship, and exclusive creation; they benefit only those whom God has destined to believe. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Specifying believers signals that manifest signs do not benefit those whose destiny is unbelief."}, {"id": "6:99/q42/p3", "position": "The phrase addresses those seeking faith", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Al-Qadi says those who believe are those seeking faith, since evidence is available to all. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting القاضي: Al-Qadi takes the people who believe as those seeking faith in God."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q43", "question": "What do the signs in growth establish?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q43/p1", "position": "The stages of growth demonstrate resurrection", "reasons": "MUQATIL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. TAB-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. TAB-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. ZAJJAJ: Stages of creation prove God can resurrect deniers; creatures cannot produce such changes. ZAJJAJ: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. WAHIDI-BASIT: Believers infer that God who produces plants can raise the dead. WAHIDI-BASIT: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. TABRISI: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. RAZI-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. RAZI-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. QURTUBI-FULL: The growth and changing fruits prove divine power, wisdom, oneness or resurrection. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The command focuses on visible fruit as evidence for resurrection and unity; the later parallel in 6:141 addresses eating and charity while refuting Arab idol practices and self-imposed prohibitions. | mentions 6:141 ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The passage now turns to signs of God's mercy, providence, power, wisdom, and oneness, which also testify to the hereafter and are visible to those willing to believe."}, {"id": "6:99/q43/p2", "position": "The changing, diverse growth proves God's power, wisdom and oneness", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL: Nature, seasons and stars affect unlike bodies similarly, so their different outcomes require a choosing wise governor. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: The changing, diverse genera and kinds emerging from one source show a capable, wise, knowing creator who chooses among possible states and has no rival or opponent; the verse leads into rebuke of associating partners. | mentions 6:100 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: One cause, water, yields many different outcomes, as another verse says that crops drink from one water while their produce differs. | mentions 13:4 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الفراء: Al-Farra assigns this form to Qays and Hijaz dialects and says kasra is more common among Arabs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Presenting the palm clusters as a nominal sentence signals that this provision is established and assured. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: Its juice is delicious, temperate, strengthening, and both food and medicine; combining opposed qualities in one fruit displays God’s power. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الجمهور والأعمش والحباب والأعرج: The majority use qaf kasra, called Hijazi; al-Aʿmash, al-Habbab from Abu ʿAmr, and al-Aʿraj use ḍamma. Al-Farra assigns it to Qays and says kasra is more common; Ibn ʿAtiyya reverses the Hijazi label. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الشيخ: The cited poem does not prove omitted predicates: بريئا can predicate of singular, dual, or plural, and can be shared by the pronoun and its conjunct; as two circumstantial states it would need dual agreement. BURSEVI, d. 1127: Fruit changes from one state to its opposite despite growing in the same soil and receiving the same water; this points to the wise, merciful, all-knowing power directing creation. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: Only the nearby palms are mentioned because they imply the contrasting kind and signal an added blessing. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270: The signs are great or numerous proofs of the existence and oneness of a capable, wise creator. ELMALILI, d. 1361 reporting Fahreddin Râzî: Razi describes pomegranate as rind, membranes, seeds, and juice: its first three parts are powerfully cold, dry, dense, and astringent, while its tasty, delicate juice is nearer to balance, suits balanced constitutions, strengthens weak ones, and acts as both food and medicine. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The general wording points to plants' diverse qualities, fruits, natures, properties, and tastes despite their common origin in rainwater, a sign of God's immense power. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Though less central than palms to Arab life, the trees were scarce in Arab lands and prized for their fruit and ownership, so they are cited as signs of divine craft and grace. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: The parse causes no semantic problem: noticing signs of deliberate design in some plants guides the mind to comparable signs in others. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: People who see nature's elements sustain a date tree still foolishly imagine the world as a contest among many deities and competing intentions. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: People reconstruct an entire ancient culture from a broken pottery fragment, yet fail to understand the abundant wisdom of God displayed in nature or take guidance from it. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The wisdom in every part of the universe shows that it was created by a powerful, wise, knowing being, rather than arising by itself or through an uncontrolled force. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The elements of nature and the seasons serve growth in specific proportions, which requires one ruling will to harmonize th
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
