<<chunk 55, part 1 of 0..5>>
 The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. JISHUMI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. BAGHAWI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNATIYYA-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TABRISI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TABRISI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TABRISI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TABRISI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. TABRISI: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. RAZI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. RAZI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. RAZI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. RAZI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. QURTUBI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. QURTUBI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. QURTUBI-FULL: The word for fruit has fatḥa or ḍamma readings and plural analyses. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 reporting حمزة والكسائي: Ḥamza and al-Kisāʾī read the tāʾ and mīm with ḍamma, treating thumur as a plural of thamarah or of thimār. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: Yanʿ means the fruit's ripeness or its ripe state; it is originally the verbal noun of ripening, or a plural of yāniʿ, and is also read with ḍamma or as yāniʿ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting ابن وثاب، مجاهد، حمزة، الكسائي: Ibn Waththāb, Mujāhid, Ḥamza, and al-Kisāʾī read ثمره with ḍamma on both letters; Ibn Waththāb and Mujāhid explain it as kinds of wealth yielded by the tree. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The distinction offered for al-Kahf—ḍamma for wealth and fatḥ for edible fruit—cannot explain the readings in al-Anʿām and Yāsīn. | mentions 18:34, 36:35 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: As a parallel reading example, Abu ʿAmr, al-Kisaʾi, and Qunbul read خشب, while the others use ḍamma; the author calls the former reading analogous to the one just discussed. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الأخوان، author: The Brothers' double-ḍamma reading ثمر admits four analyses: a singular noun, a plural of plurals, a plural of ثمر, or a plural of ثمرة. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 reporting حمزة والكسائي: Hamza and al-Kisai read ثمره with a damma on the first letter, as a plural of ثمرة or of ثمار. QIRAAT-ER: The thumur variant has ḍamma on both syllables and makes the sense explicitly plural fruits rather than collective fruit."}, {"id": "6:99/q31/p2", "position": "Thamar has fatḥa on both consonants", "reasons": "TAB-FULL: Medinan and some Basran readers use fatḥa on both consonants of thamar. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 reporting حمزة وعلى: Hamza and al-Kisāʾī read thumurihi, the plural of thamar, which is itself a plural form. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting باقي السبعة: The other seven canonical readers have fatḥa on both letters; Abū Ḥayyān analyzes ثمر as a collective noun like شجر. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting أبو علي: Abū ʿAlī prefers ثمر as a plural of ثمرة, on the pattern of خشبة and خشب, with comparable plurals from weak nouns. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: One analysis treats ثمر as a singular noun, like طنب or عنق. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Another analysis makes ثمر a plural of plurals: ثمر is plural of ثمار, itself plural of ثمرة, comparable to أكم and إكام. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: A third analysis treats ثمر as a plural of ثمر, by analogy with the two plural forms أسد and أسد. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 reporting الفارسي: Al-Farisi prefers reading ثمر as the plural of ثمرة, like خشبة/خشب, أكمة/أكم, and the defective pairs لابة/لوب, ناقة/نوق, ساحة/سوح. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The majority's fatḥ reading الثمر is a collective noun whose singular is ثمرة, like شجر/شجرة, بقر/بقرة, and جزر/جزرة. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: Alternatively الينع is a plural of يانع, like تاجر/تجر and صاحب/صحب; ينعت and أينعت both mean that fruit ripened, in triliteral and quadriliteral forms. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885: The fruit at first appearance is weak and of little or no benefit; ينع refers to its ripening when it is ready for harvest. DURR-FULL, d. 911 reporting عاصم: Asim recited thamar with fatḥa on both thāʾ and mīm, and yanʿihi with fatḥa on the yāʾ. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393: Most readers pronounce thamar with fatḥ on both consonants; Ḥamza, al-Kisāʾī, and Khalaf pronounce both with ḍamm, a broken plural pattern like khashab and nuq. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: People could survive on bread and water, so abundant fruit that delights taste and smell manifests the Creator's generosity and is meant to awaken purification and innate gratitude, religion's foundation. ISLAHI-TADABBUR: The singular pronoun in “its fruit” refers collectively to everything just mentioned, while pointing separately to each item so readers reflect on each one."}, {"id": "6:99/q31/p3", "position": "Thumr has ḍamma then a still mīm", "reasons": "NAHHAS: Al-A'mash reads thumr with ḍamma on thāʾ and still mīm, by easing or a plural pattern. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting فرقة: Another group reads with ḍamma on thāʾ and a still mīm for ease, like saying كتب for الكتب. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: In al-Anʿām and Yāsīn, ʿĀsim, Nāfiʿ, Ibn Kathir, Ibn ʿAmir, and Abu ʿAmr read fatḥ; in al-Kahf, ʿĀsim reads fatḥ, the Brothers and Nāfiʿ/Ibn Kathir/Ibn ʿAmir double ḍamma, and Abu ʿAmr ḍamma with sukūn. | mentions 18:34 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: The rare reading with a still second radical either eases the double-ḍamma reading or is a plural of ثمرة; with the latter analysis, ثمر parallels سمر and its broken plural is أثمار."}, {"id": "6:99/q31/p4", "position": "Thumur can denote wealth or fruitful property", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL: Mujahid says thamar can mean wealth whereas tamr means dates."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q32", "question": "How is the word junction read?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q32/p1", "position": "The word junction has a canonical ḍamma on hamzat al-waṣl", "reasons": "QIRAAT-ER: The junction reads hamza al-waṣl with ḍamma rather than kasra, a canonical phonetic variation in liaison between the words."}]}
{"id": "6:99/q33", "question": "What is the fruit's yanʿ?", "turns_on": "The sources give different referents, forms, parses, or implications for this wording.", "positions": [{"id": "6:99/q33/p1", "position": "Yanʿ is the fruit's ripeness and full maturity", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. MAJAZ: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. ABDURRAZZAQ: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TAB-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. ZAJJAJ: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. ZAJJAJ: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNABIHATIM: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNABIHATIM: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. THALABI: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. MAWARDI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. WAHIDI-BASIT: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. WAHIDI-BASIT: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. WAHIDI-BASIT: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. JISHUMI: Abu Ubayda analyzes yanʿ as a plural of yāniʿ, like tajir and tajr. BAGHAWI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. TABRISI: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. IBNJAWZI-ZAD: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. RAZI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. RAZI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL: Yanʿ means ripeness and full maturity. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 reporting الأخفش: Al-Akhfash glosses khadiran as green, citing an Arabic expression about seeing a striped garment as rain-colored. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685: At first fruiting, the fruit is tiny and scarcely useful; at ripening it becomes large, useful, and delicious. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710: At first the fruit emerges weak and unusable; at ripeness it becomes useful, showing God's power and care in moving it between states. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting الحجاج: Al-Hajjaj's line about heads that have ripened uses أينعت metaphorically for maturity and the time to harvest. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 reporting المروزي: Al-Marwazī says alternating winds expose fruit to sun and then shade, preventing both failure to ripen and scorching. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745: The verse singles out the beginning and ripeness, though intermediate stages invite reflection, because the endpoints are more remarkable and clearer proofs. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756: المخاضرة is selling green fruit before ripening; الخضيرة is a palm whose unripe dates fall while green. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 reporting البراء بن عازب وابن عباس والضحاك وعطاء الخراساني والسدي وقتادة وغيرهم: Al-Baraʾ ibn ʿAzib, Ibn ʿAbbas, al-Dahhak, ʿAta al-Khurasani, al-Suddi, Qatada, and others gloss yanʿ as 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
