<<chunk 70, part 4 of 0..5>>
Baghawi and Ibn al-Hissar claiming revelation, consensus or tawatur fixed placement. Al-Baghawi says the Preserved Tablet's order passed to the lowest heaven and then piecemeal revelation; Ibn al-Hissar says prophetic directions specified each verse. Ibn Abbas reports the basmala marked sura completion or beginning, with one chain meeting the two Sahihs' standard and another called sound; Shiite reports from al-Baqir parallel them. Tabatabai rejects using descent reports to prove the current codex's order."}, {"id": "15:9/q17/p2", "position": "Companions judged where to place some separately revealed verses and ordered suras in the two collections.", "reasons": "Tabatabai points to the first collection's search for verses, late Meccan verses in Medinan suras and vice versa, and Uthman's moving al-Anfal and Bara'a between al-A'raf and Yunus; an Ibn Jubayr report instead lists Yunus as seventh of the long suras. He says Ali's codex followed revelation order while Ubayy's and Ibn Masud's differed. He reads Ibn Abbas's basmala reports as implying sequential original order, so current cross-period placement reflects later judgment. He rejects claimed consensus, tawatur and the idea of mere physical binding: reports establish wording but not exact placements; Zayd lacked some verses and Anas named only four collectors. His alternative remains compatible with preservation of divine qualities where order changes leave meaning intact."}]}
{"id": "15:9/q18", "question": "What evidence establishes the present Qur'an's authenticity and limits?", "turns_on": "Whether preservation is established by the Qur'an's present qualities and public history, or undermined by solitary collection and variant reports; and what each line of proof can actually exclude.", "positions": [{"id": "15:9/q18/p1", "position": "Its present divine qualities, public recitation and continuity establish the Qur'an's preservation.", "reasons": "Tabatabai says Muhammad historically preached and brought this Book; it retains an unmatched eloquence, no real contradiction (4:82), a challenge to humans and jinn (17:88), decisive speech (86:13-14), unified tawhid, guidance, light, truthful prophecy, and religious purity compared with the Testaments. The Prophet taught it publicly; readers and learners remained active even through Yamama; first oral and written transmission and agreed codex prevented its disappearance. Its qualities prove attribution wherever found, without first depending on tawatur. He cites hadith al-Thaqalayn, instructions to test reports against the Qur'an, and the Imams' use of today's text and directions to read it. Burhan calls the Qur'an internally consistent and says revelation and prophethood should be read by principles of preservation and the Prophet's truthfulness (53:3); he allows some ambiguous passages to remain undecidable. Study Quran invokes 41:42, 4:82, 18:1 and 75:17."}, {"id": "15:9/q18/p2", "position": "Collection reports exclude additions and changes decisively, but alone exclude every omission only probabilistically.", "reasons": "Tabatabai cites Umar's alleged unwritten stoning verse and Ibn Masud's denial of al-Falaq and al-Nas; other Companions and mass-transmitted Imami reports affirm both suras. He says no proof of threefold tawatur for all aspects and allows only hypothetical loss of a repeated verse or harmless point or inflection without loss of the Qur'an's described qualities. He nevertheless holds the present text has the qualities of revelation."}, {"id": "15:9/q18/p3", "position": "Textual alteration or omission occurred in the collection, at least in some passages.", "reasons": "Tabatabai reports positions of some Shia and Sunni hadith scholars and Hashwiyya alleging omission or reordering, generally not addition, and allegations of limited additions, deletions and changes. Proponents invoke many Shia and Sunni reports, different companion codices, variant readings, the uncertainty of a fallible collector, Ali's rejected codex and the Muslim precedent of earlier communities. One report claims more than 2,000 lost verses between al-Nisa passages; others say al-Tawba once equaled al-Baqara and al-Ahzab exceeded it by 200 verses. A report about Ibn Masud's omission of the two protective suras is also adduced."}, {"id": "15:9/q18/p4", "position": "The distortion arguments and reports do not prove textual corruption.", "reasons": "Tabatabai says consensus is only probable and depends on prophethood whose living proof is the Qur'an; using disputed traditions is similarly circular. The reports are mostly isolated, conflicting, weak or susceptible to insertion, including Israelite material; their alleged extra passages fail the Qur'an's style. A plausible interpolation possibility defeats even apparently sound chains. Ali's codex may have differed only in order; he made no recorded omitted-verse argument about his authority. Muslim imitation of earlier communities can mean sectarian division and corrupt interpretation, not identical textual histories. He rejects relying on ordinary reality alone as proof and treats Qur'anic qualities as the decisive test."}]}
{"id": "15:9/q19", "question": "How should reports alleged to show omitted or altered wording be read?", "turns_on": "Whether a transmitted wording claims actual lost revelation or records paraphrase, application, devotion, weak variants or asserted recitation abrogation.", "positions": [{"id": "15:9/q19/p1", "position": "Many are explanation, application, devotional addition or paraphrase, not textual variants.", "reasons": "Tabatabai groups al-Sadiq's explanation of twisting commands, reports about Ali as occasion of revelation, Banu Tamim named in an occasion report, applications to Muhammad's family or to allegiance to Ali, and al-Rida's devotional 'Thus is my Lord' after al-Ikhlas among cases mistaken for lost words. Badr variants 'weak' and 'few' paraphrase 'humiliated'; a report objects to calling believers humiliated while the Prophet was among them. The Imams' use of today's wording supports explanatory readings of expressions like 'thus it descended'."}, {"id": "15:9/q19/p2", "position": "Conflicting and weak alleged variant reports cannot establish omitted Qur'an.", "reasons": "Tabatabai cites incompatible stoning verse endings and divergent Throne Verse additions, rejects the view that agreement on the basic claim makes the variants probative, and notes fabrication in hadith books. He rejects both forgetting and textual alteration reports as conflicting with the Qur'an and resists 'abrogation of recitation': removing useful revealed speech would abandon remembrance, while the Qur'an's unrestricted descriptions as preserved, decisive, guidance and light forbid such a carve-out. Reports can at most leave limited omission uncertain on historical grounds."}, {"id": "15:9/q19/p3", "position": "They record real textual loss, change or abrogation of recitation.", "reasons": "Tabatabai reports alleged large omissions, Umar's unwritten stoning verse, variant companion codices and reports of forgetting. He says proponents distinguish abrogation of ruling and recitation from recitation-only abrogation but finds neither adequate to the Qur'an's own descriptions."}]}
{"id": "15:9/q20", "question": "How does this verse answer its surrounding passage?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "15:9/q20/p1", "position": "It answers the mockery in 15:6 by affirming divine revelation and guaranteed preservation, while consoling the Prophet.", "reasons": "Kashshaf, Ibn Atiyya, Razi, Baydawi, Nasafi, Biqai, Alusi, Ibn Ashur, Tabatabai, Kuranyolu and Islahi link it to the charge of madness or jinn speech. Ibn Ashur says the answer to the angel demand in 15:7 precedes this reply to 15:6 in reverse order; the second clause intensifies the rebuke and points forward. Biqai adds the Prophet's sound reason and trustworthy judgment as a counter to madness. Islahi says the Prophet is charged with conveying, not compelling acceptance; Quraysh's rejection should not distress him. Asad calls guidance through revelation the sura's main theme, and Tabatabai describes the sura's consolation, warning and glad tidings."}]}
{"id": "15:9/q21", "question": "What does the Qur'an's endurance show about its origin and the Messenger?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "15:9/q21/p1", "position": "Its enduring inimitability and fulfilled preservation promise attest divine origin and prophethood.", "reasons": "Kashshaf and Nasafi say human speech would admit additions and omissions. Razi calls nearly six centuries of fulfillment foreknowledge of the unseen and notes hostile efforts failed; Elmalili extends the observation to Hijri 1349, more than thirteen and a half centuries, distinguishing practical survival from the verse's intellectual miracle of prediction. Asad points to an unchanged text since the seventh century. Nashr says hostile eloquent Arabs could not rival even a verse, despite eight centuries of recitation; Tabatabai lists preservation among the Qur'an's predictive challenges. Ibn Ashur says a human composition would corrupt or contradict (4:82); the promise honors the Book, angers polytheists and announces religion's endurance. Nashr adds that its inexhaustible guidance meant no succession of prophets was needed, links 35:32's chosen inheritors to preservation, and transmits Anas's report of God's special people with trustworthy transmitters. Tabatabai calls the verse exceptionally rich in truths."}]}
{"id": "15:9/q22", "question": "Can the preservation verse itself refute claims of textual corruption?", "turns_on": "Whether the challenged verse's integrity may be assumed when the very integrity of the received text is disputed.", "positions": [{"id": "15:9/q22/p1", "position": "Yes: its promise rules out additions, omissions and alterations.", "reasons": "Al-Qadi invokes the verse against some Imamis who allege alteration; Alusi recounts the same argument. Tabatabai inste
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
