<<chunk 85, part 1 of 0..5>>
s": [{"id": "20:51/q09/p1", "position": "Their histories were not yet revealed to him, because the Torah came after Pharaoh's destruction.", "reasons": "Maqātil says Moses could not tell their fate for this chronological reason; al-Naqqāsh is reported by Ibn ʿAṭiyya and Abū Ḥayyān, and Ibn al-Jawzī attributes a similar account to Maqātil. Abū Ḥayyān also connects it with Pharaoh's test of Moses before the Torah."}, {"id": "20:51/q09/p2", "position": "Their unseen fate and histories belong to God's knowledge; a messenger knows only what God reveals.", "reasons": "Ibn al-Jawzī reports another view that a messenger does not know unseen reports; al-Rāzī contrasts Moses' rational answer to a question about God with his referral of transmitted history to the Knower of the unseen. Al-Qurṭubī states the limit of revelation, and al-Kashshāf locates happiness and wretchedness in the unseen. Al-Wāḥidī says deeds are preserved for recompense; Kur'an Yolu says God neither errs nor forgets. Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾ links Moses' reply to the apparent erasure of the dead and their deeds."}, {"id": "20:51/q09/p3", "position": "God's eternal, errorless knowledge encompasses and records their states, grounding knowledge of the afterlife in His attributes.", "reasons": "Al-Qāshānī reads the question as the self's concealment from resurrection and afterlife happiness or misery; Moses' response refers to the Preserved Tablet. Abū Ḥayyān reports al-Zamakhsharī's suggestion that Pharaoh tests God's encompassing knowledge of remote generations and their parts, to which Moses contrasts divine record with Pharaoh's fallibility."}]}
{"id": "20:51/q10", "question": "What other grammatical observations occur among the notes?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "20:51/q10/p1", "position": "Demonstratives and relatives have distinctive diminutive patterns and endings.", "reasons": "Sibawayh says demonstratives retain their initial vowels and add final alifs; he gives hādhā to hadhayyā, dhāka to dhayyāka and alā to alayyā. He locates the diminutive yāʾ of dhā in third position and deletes one crowded yāʾ; tayyā is from tā. He cites Kaʿb al-Ghanawī and ʿImrān ibn Ḥiṭṭān for tamānī and hātā. Extended ulāʾ becomes ulayyāʾ, with feminine forms avoiding ambiguity. Relative alladhī and allatī yield alladhayyā and allatayyā, supported by al-ʿAjjāj; final alifs drop in duals through frequent use. Relative man and ayyu resist diminution because they remain interrogative forms, unlike alladhī; allātī needs no diminutive because allatiyyāt supplies it, compared to masiyyān and ʿashiyyān instead of a diminutive of qaṣr."}, {"id": "20:51/q10/p2", "position": "Feminine diminutives take or omit tāʾ according to word structure, established usage, and whether the name is a shared adjective.", "reasons": "Sibawayh adds tāʾ to three-letter feminine nouns; al-Khalīl says it marks femininity but ʿanāq omits it for heaviness. Shortened samāʾ gives sumayya; a woman named Siqāʾ gives siqīqī without suffix. He reports two analyses of ḥubārā, one preserving a feminine marker and another retaining a four-letter form; a late-position feminine alif yields lughayghīza from lughayzā. A shared masculine adjective such as niṣf, riḍā or khalīq remains masculine for a woman. Al-Khalīl analyzes she-camel al-nāb as nuyayyib on its established masculine name. Pure female proper names Ḥajar and Faras give Ḥujayra and Furaysa. Sibawayh omits tāʾ for a man named ʿAyn or Udhun, while Yūnus adds it and cites Udhayna."}, {"id": "20:51/q10/p3", "position": "Feminine double-alif endings are diptote, while superficially similar hamzas and reduplicated forms have other analyses.", "reasons": "Sibawayh says the second alif becomes hamza to avoid adjacent vowelless letters and retains the feminine marking effect in definite and indefinite use. The pattern does not merely lengthen triliterals; ʿalbāʾ and ḥirbāʾ instead replace yāʾ, with alif plus yāʾ lengthening. Some Arabs use masculine declinable qūbāʾ like fusṭāṭ. Ghawghāʾ can be feminine diptote like ʿawrāʾ or masculine declinable with reduplicated sounds like qaḍqāḍ or qamqām."}, {"id": "20:51/q10/p4", "position": "Weak-letter substitution and reduplication account for several long verbal and nominal forms.", "reasons": "Al-Khalīl says five-letter verbs such as aghzaytu and ghāzaytu turn wāw to yāʾ after the imperfect loses wāw under kasra; taghāzaynā and tarjaynā then show alif replacing that yāʾ, with tāʾ added to ghāzaytu and rajaytu. Sibawayh treats ḍawḍaytu and qawqaytu as paired reduplication parallel to ḥayaytu and quwwa; ḥāḥaytu and ʿāʿaytu similarly substitute alif for yāʾ, supported by al-ḥayḥāʾ and al-ʿayʿāʾ. Al-Khalīl derives dahdaytu al-juʿal from dahdahtu, yāʾ replacing light hāʾ. Ghawghāʾ has feminine diptote or masculine declinable reduplicated analyses; related forms analogize to qamqām, ghaṣaṣ and ghaṣṣa. Mūmāh has root mīm like dūdāh and marmar, since an added initial mīm is rare; fīfāh has extra alif because al-fayyif has the same meaning. Qayqāʾ and zayzāʾ follow ʿalbāʾ, while qalqāl is only a verbal noun; added fourth-position yāʾ behaves like a root in salqaytu and jaʿbaytu. Al-murūrāh follows al-shujūjāh and ṣamḥamaḥ as the more common pattern, not ʿathawthal. Qayqāʾa and zayzāʾa are singulars; some say qayqāʾa and qawqāq, with substitution like qīl. Athfiyya is fiʿliyya for speakers of athaftu, but afʿūla for speakers of thafaytu."}, {"id": "20:51/q10/p5", "position": "A relative clause after ayyu-hum is regular with huwa; omission is awkward or, in a longer construction, rare.", "reasons": "Sibawayh accepts ayyu-hum huwa afḍal and similar clauses, but judges ayyu-hum ʿāqil awkward. Al-Khalīl reports an Arab's rare mā anā bi-lladhī qāʾil laka shayʾan; Sibawayh rejects a shortened version with munṭaliq, saying few use even the longer possibility."}]}
{"id": "20:51/q11", "question": "What other lexical observation occurs among the notes?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "20:51/q11/p1", "position": "Faraṭ is going ahead; ifrāṭ is overshooting and tafrīṭ is falling behind an obligation.", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabrisī compares faraṭ to a person going ahead toward water and derives excess and neglect from the respective directions of departure from what is right."}]}
{"id": "20:51/q12", "question": "What other observations about Qur'anic interpretation occur among the notes?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "20:51/q12/p1", "position": "The community could preserve and read one of seven revealed aḥruf; the other six were neither abrogated nor forgotten.", "reasons": "Al-Ṭabarī distinguishes the Prophet's reports about seven wordings from the present written Qur'an and compares the permitted choice to selecting one of three expiations for a broken oath."}, {"id": "20:51/q12/p2", "position": "Study of rhetorical artistry is essential for explaining Qur'anic inimitability and coherence.", "reasons": "Bint al-Shāṭiʾ criticizes earlier neglect and singles out al-Rāzī for brief treatment in al-Nihāya despite his theological command. She reports Ibn Ḥamza al-ʿAlawī's al-Ṭirāz as an answer to that need and Ḥājjī Khalīfa's praise of al-Biqāʿī's Naẓm al-Durar for unprecedented precision in coherence, Qur'anic secrets, and difficult meanings."}]}
{"id": "20:52/q01", "question": "What was Pharaoh asking about the earlier generations, and why?", "turns_on": "The reported readings differ over whether Pharaoh sought history, resurrection, fate, a challenge to omniscience, or a distraction from Moses' proof.", "positions": [{"id": "20:52/q01/p1", "position": "He challenged why earlier peoples had not recognized or worshipped the Creator despite the evident proof, or had denied revelation.", "reasons": "Al-Tabari says Pharaoh pressed the implication of Moses' description of the creator and sustainer. Al-Alusi reports variants focused on failure to infer the Creator from creation or guidance, and on denial of revelation followed by punishment; the answer refers the matter to divine knowledge or decree."}, {"id": "20:52/q01/p2", "position": "He diverted Moses from a persuasive argument by raising ancestral history or fate.", "reasons": "Razi prefers fear that Moses would expose Pharaoh publicly. Al-Biqa'i says the discussion was unproductive. Ibn Ashur compares the appeal to ancestors in 10:78 and says either answer on their punishment could alienate descendants or aid Pharaoh; Moses' answer frustrates the diversion. Kuranyolu reports Razi's reading. Al-Tabataba'i rejects the diversion-and-history account as disconnected from the preceding argument; al-Burhan describes the tactic of turning a bigoted opponent to another subject before returning to the premise."}, {"id": "20:52/q01/p3", "position": "He asked about the prior nations' resurrection or the time of their raising.", "reasons": "Al-Tabrisi connects it to Moses' call to believe in resurrection. Ibn al-Jawzi and Abu Hayyan report that this reading takes the pronoun in 'their knowledge' to refer to the Resurrection. Al-Alusi dismisses this proposal, especially that pronoun reference; al-Hasan's gloss of the time of resurrection presupposes it."}, {"id": "20:52/q01/p4", "position": "He asked the destiny, happiness, or misery of earlier people, perhaps suggesting the powerful escape consequences.", "reasons": "Al-Alusi reports a link to 'peace upon whoever follows guidance' in 20:47 but rejects it because the general rule of salvation and punishment was already stated. Ibn Ashur says discussion of creation may prompt the dead's fate. Asad stresses that only God can assess motives and spiritual merits; Kuranyolu suggests Pharaoh implied powerful people escape consequences."}, {"id": "20:52/q01/p5", "position": "He challenged whether God could know all the details of ancient multitudes and assign their forms and properties.", "reasons": "Baydawi links the challenge to God's power over particulars. Al-Alusi reports a test using generations Pharaoh knew, or a quick trap that avoided a broad
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
