<<chunk 138, part 4 of 0..5>>
d prevents treating God as the Prophet's private deity like a pagan idol; al-Biqāʿī connects testimony of unity."}, {"id": "73:8/q08/p4", "position": "It culminates a sequence of prophetic spiritual training.", "reasons": "An unnamed source in al-Sulamī describes discipline by commands and prohibitions, refinement through decree and power, dissolution of agency, then retreat to God."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q01", "question": "What does أدنى mean here?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q01/p1", "position": "Adnā means less than the stated portion.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): Adna means less than two-thirds of the night. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Adnā, literally nearer, is used here for less: when two things are closer, fewer intervals lie between them. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Adnā is used metaphorically for less, since what is nearer to a thing is less distant from it. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Adnā means less; “nearer” is used metaphorically because shorter distance leaves fewer intervening spaces. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Adnā here means 'less than'; using 'nearer' for 'less' is a metonymy, since less distance leaves fewer intervening spaces. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): أدنى literally means nearer, from دنو; it is metaphorically used for less because the distance to the nearest thing is small, just as farther can denote more. MUQATIL: Adna means less; the Prophet and believers prayed a part of the night, half or a third. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ibn Abbas and Muqatil say adna means less, citing 2:61. BAGHAWI-FULL: Adna means less than two-thirds. KASHSHAF-FULL: Adna means less by metaphor from nearness and fewer intervening spaces."}, {"id": "73:20/q01/p2", "position": "Adnā means nearer to the stated portion.", "reasons": "MAJAZ: Adna means closer or nearer. JISHUMI: Adna means nearer, like worldly life being nearer than afterlife."}, {"id": "73:20/q01/p3", "position": "Ibn Kathīr and the Kūfans read naṣfahu and thuluthahu in the accusative, coordinated with adnā.", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (ابن كثير والكوفيون): Ibn Kathīr and the Kūfans read naṣfahu and thuluthahu in the accusative, coordinated with adnā."}, {"id": "73:20/q01/p4", "position": "In the reading under discussion, wa-nisfahu and wa-thuluthahu are accusative and coordinated with adna.", "reasons": "ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): In the reading under discussion, wa-nisfahu and wa-thuluthahu are accusative and coordinated with adna."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q02", "question": "How are the night fractions read and understood?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q02/p1", "position": "The half and third are genitive and share the preceding preposition.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الباقون): The remaining readers use the genitive for half and a third. TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو الحسن): For the genitive reading, Abū al-Ḥasan understands a concession to pray less than the required amount. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): An objection says the genitive reading in 73:20 means the Prophet rose for less than one third, apparently leaving a required third undone. | mentions 73:3 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): With the accusative reading, the phrase means the Prophet rises less than two thirds and also rises half and a third; with genitive, less than each of two thirds, half, and a third. | mentions 73:2 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قراءة العامة): The common genitive reading coordinates “half” and “third” with “two-thirds”: stand less than two-thirds, less than half, or less than a third; Abū ʿUbayd and Abū Ḥātim prefer it. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Al-Samin notes that the genitive parse poses a syntactic difficulty, which the following discussion addresses. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): Kufans and Ibn Kathir read ونصفه وثلثه in the accusative; the remaining readers use genitive. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The reading with genitive half and third is incompatible with an analysis that allows exactly half; if the less-than-half clause already implies half, mentioning increase is likewise unnecessary. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (العربيان ونافع): The genitive reading coordinates half and third with the two-thirds phrase, meaning less than two-thirds, less than half, and less than a third. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Nâfi‘, Ebû Amr, İbn Âmir, Ebû Ca‘fer, Ya‘kūb): These readers construe the fractions in genitive coordination with two-thirds, yielding: less than two-thirds, half, and one-third of the night. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (نافع وابن عامر وأبو عمرو وأبو جعفر ويعقوب): These readers put ونصفه وثلثه in the genitive, coordinating them with ثلثي الليل: the vigil is for less than half or less than a third. QIRAAT-ER (CE): The CE genitive niṣfihi is coordinated with thuluthayī, so both are governed by min: 'less than two-thirds and its half and its third.' QIRAAT-ER (CE): The CE genitive thuluthihi parallels the niṣfihi variant; both are governed by min through thuluthayī. FARRA: Al-Farra prefers accusative half and third over genitive because they specify the lesser amount. TAB-FULL: Medina and Basra readers use genitive for less than two-thirds, half, or third. NAHHAS: Hasan, Abu Amr, Abu Ja'far, Shayba, and Nafi use genitive fractions. NAHHAS: Abu Ubayd prefers genitive because the verse says worshippers cannot measure night. NAHHAS: Both communal readings parse soundly: genitive means less than each fraction, accusative separate half and third; measuring argument proves nothing. NAHHAS: Farra allows mixed parsing of accusative third and genitive half based on report that Prophet reached a third. FARISI-HUJJA: Abu Amr, Nafi, and Ibn Amir use genitive; others accusative. FARISI-HUJJA: Abu al-Hasan objects that genitive implies less than prescribed third. FARISI-HUJJA: Genitive can show worshippers failed to complete prescribed fractions. WAHIDI-BASIT: Genitive joins fractions to min, less than each. WAHIDI-BASIT: Abu al-Hasan objects that genitive suggests failing the required third. WAHIDI-BASIT: Verse arranger says genitive minimum was one quarter, not less. JISHUMI: These readers use genitive, with adna applying to all three fractions. BAGHAWI-FULL: Other readers use genitive and kasra on final ha. KASHSHAF-FULL: Genitive gives less than each of two-thirds, half, or third; periods include quarter. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Abu Amr, Nafi, and Ibn Amir use genitive; inability concerns time count."}, {"id": "73:20/q02/p2", "position": "The half and third are accusative and describe separate vigil amounts.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن كثير وأهل الكوفة): Ibn Kathīr and the Kufans read half and a third in the accusative. TABRISI, d. 548 (أبو علي): Abū ʿAlī says the accusative reading attaches half and a third to adnā, itself accusative. TABRISI, d. 548 (author): With the accusative reading, the phrase means standing half and a third of the night. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن كثير والكوفيون): Ibn Kathīr and the Kūfans read “half” and “third” in the accusative, coordinating them with “less”: stand less than two-thirds, or stand half or a third. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ prefers the accusative because the verse first says “less than two-thirds” and then gives the actual lesser amounts, half and a third. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (أبو عبد الله الفاسي): Al-Fasi resolves an apparent problem with the accusative by taking half on one occasion, a third on another, and less than half or a third on another. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The accusative half repeats the opening verse's half-night option. | mentions 73:3 SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari explains accusative as praying under two-thirds plus exactly half or a third, matching the earlier choices of half, less, or more. | mentions 73:3 BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (ابن كثير والكوفيون): Ibn Kathir and the Kufan readers put half and third in the accusative, specifying the amounts included under less than two-thirds. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The accusative half and third are coordinated with adnā, describing praying less than two-thirds and praying a half or a third of the night. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (العربيان ونافع): The accusative reading coordinates half and third with adnā: the verse describes standing less than two-thirds, then standing half and a third. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): أدنى is an adverbial accusative with تقوم: the Prophet stands for a period shorter than two thirds, meaning more than half, as 73:4 indicates. | mentions 73:4 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (ابن كثير وعاصم وحمزة والكسائي وخلف): These readers put ونصفه وثلثه in the accusative as objects of تقوم, describing standing for two thirds, half, or a third, without going below half or a third. TAB-FULL: Mecca and Kufa readers use accusative for also standing half or third. ZAJJAJ: Accusative half and third clarify the lesser portion meant by less than two-thirds. NAHHAS: Asim, A'mash, Hamza, and Kisa'i use accusative half and third. NAHHAS: Farra prefers accusative specifying the small amount. FARISI-HUJJA: Accusative attaches to adna, nearer, yielding under two-thirds plus half or third. WAHIDI-BASIT: Wahidi prefers accusative half and third, meaning under two-thirds plus half or third. JISHUMI: Other readers use accusative, implying stand half and third, with adna only two-thirds. BAGHAWI-FULL: Mecca and Kufa use accusative with implied verb. KASHSHAF-FULL: Accusative gives under two-thirds plus half or third, matching earlier options. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Other Seven use accusative; inability takes another sense."}, {"id": "73:20/q02/p3", "position": "The lām of the third fraction is quiescent.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن السميقع وأبو حيوة وهشام): Ibn al-Sumayqa, Abū Ḥaywa, and Hishām in the Syrian reading tradition use a sukūn on the lām of thuluthay. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The majority pronounce the lām
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
