<<chunk 139, part 0 of 0..1>>
{"id": "73:20/q03", "question": "Who is the group with the Prophet, and how is the phrase construed?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q03/p1", "position": "The group consists of believers who followed the Prophet's vigil.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): The group accompanying the Prophet consists of the believers. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The group with the Prophet refers to his companions, who also rose for the stated portion of the night. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): A group of the Prophet's companions also rose for that amount of the night. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says the Prophet and a group of companions maintained the commanded vigil for ten years, until the final verse eased it. | mentions 73:20 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): The Prophet and some companions varied between these portions without aiming at exact fractions, because maintaining the prescribed vigil was difficult. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Those with the Prophet are his companions in words and deeds, meaning Muslims; the broader phrase avoids implying that those who did not pray were not Muslims. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (البحر): Al-Baḥr argues that mentioning only a group with the Prophet shows the vigil was not obligatory for everyone, since universal obligation would call for wording about all his companions. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Because this exact vigil is beyond everyone, even those able to keep it, such as the Prophet and some Companions, suffer by adding extra time as a precaution. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (أبو حنيفة وأحمد في رواية): Abu Hanifa and one report from Ahmad hold that even a short single verse suffices and al-Fātiḥa is not specifically required; they cite 55:64 as an example, while Abu Hanifa’s two companions disagree on both points. | mentions 55:64 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (صاحبا أبي حنيفة): Abu Hanifa’s two companions disagree with him on both whether one short verse suffices and whether al-Fātiḥa is required. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The difficulty applies to the obligated group collectively, not every person: the Prophet and some companions could keep the portions, so others receive a concession while the original option remains. STUDYQURAN (author): After the first sentence, the address shifts from the Prophet alone to the Prophet and his Companions together. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ibn Abbas and Muqatil say Prophet's believing companions prayed half or third with him. BAGHAWI-FULL: Believers kept vigil with Prophet. KASHSHAF-FULL: Prophet's companions kept vigil."}, {"id": "73:20/q03/p2", "position": "The group includes ʿAlī and Abū Dharr.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās identifies the accompanying group as Abū ʿAlī and Abū Dharr. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas, in a report cited by al-Majma through al-Haskani, al-Kalbi, and Abu Salih, identifies the accompanying group as Ali and Abu Dharr."}, {"id": "73:20/q03/p3", "position": "“A group” is coordinated with the pronoun in “you rise”; the coordination needs no emphatic pronoun because intervening words separate them.", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): “A group” is coordinated with the pronoun in “you rise”; the coordination needs no emphatic pronoun because intervening words separate them."}, {"id": "73:20/q03/p4", "position": "The phrase وطائفة coordinates with the hidden subject of تقوم; its mention suggests the vigil was not obligatory for every individual, unless all prayed but some separately at home.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The phrase وطائفة coordinates with the hidden subject of تقوم; its mention suggests the vigil was not obligatory for every individual, unless all prayed but some separately at home."}, {"id": "73:20/q03/p5", "position": "طائفة is coordinated with the pronoun in يقوم; the intervening adverb and its complement permit this coordination.", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): طائفة is coordinated with the pronoun in يقوم; the intervening adverb and its complement permit this coordination."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q04", "question": "What does God's measuring of night and day convey?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q04/p1", "position": "God knows and determines the precise measures of night and day.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): God apportions night and day so people can act during them as commanded. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): God knows the lengths of night and day and therefore knows how much of the night people can pray. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Only God knows the exact measures of the divisions of night and day. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن العربي): Ibn al-ʿArabī says created measure itself carries no ruling; God connects to it whichever duties He wills. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): God knows the exact measures of night and day, whereas people estimate through effort and may be mistaken. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): Only God knows the exact measures of night and day; placing God's name first signals exclusivity, supported by the statement that people cannot enumerate it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): On the genitive reading, prayer varied from night to night and people could not accurately measure the hours while sleeping; God alone knows them and eased the command to what was manageable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī says putting God's name first in the sentence expresses His exclusive control of measuring night and day; Abū Ḥayyān says exclusivity comes from context, not subject-first word order alone. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says placing Allah first as subject signals that He alone determines the night. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (author): The genitive reading describes varying prayer amounts, each below two-thirds, half, or one-third as appropriate, since sleep and human limits prevent precise measurement. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): God measures the night and day so they sometimes match and sometimes one lengthens at the expense of the other. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): God alone measures night and day with exact precision and knows every minute because He created them; the verse recalls 67:14. | mentions 67:14 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The fronted divine subject with the verb 'determines' makes God's exclusive ability to measure night and day emphatic. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (الراغب): Al-Raghib defines taqdīr as making the quantity of a thing clear. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): God alone knows the exact hours of night and day and can fulfill the right of worship in each; people can only estimate, and their effort may err. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Only God knows the precise durations and hours of night and day; placing His name as subject before yaquduru signals exclusivity, as Jar Allah argues. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God alone measures and knows the true amount of night and day, and knows all time. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The interpretation that the pronoun refers to God's measure of the night, adopted by al-Kashshāf and many others, is sound in itself, but can wrongly suggest the initial command was ill-judged. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The parenthetical statement that God measures night and day fits here because He knows all the possible durations and has made them known; readings therefore do not alter the point. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The construction subtly marks the different status and measure of the Prophet’s vigil and the group’s; 9:3 likewise distinguishes God’s disavowal from the Messenger’s public dealings with polytheists. | mentions 9:3 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The opening statement prepares for the ensuing explanation that they cannot keep the vigil’s full measure. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): والله يقدر الليل والنهار is a parenthesis between God’s knowledge of the vigil and the statement that they cannot fully measure it; its relevance was explained above. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The pronoun in lan tuhsuhu may refer to measuring night or to standing for its prescribed thirds, half, or near two-thirds. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): God knows because He is the creator and determiner; determining night and day entails determining their thirds, halves, and two-thirds. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The verse names Allah in connection with measurement because determining measures is a matter of creation, and all creation belongs to Him. NAHHAS: God measures night and day hours. MAWARDI-FULL: God determines night and day hours for servants' acts or divine decree. WAHIDI-BASIT: God knows all night divisions and times. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: God measures night and day and their periods. DAMGHANI: Yaqduru can mean to know; God knows night and day hours. BAGHAWI-FULL: Ata says God misses no deed and knows night, day, and vigil. KASHSHAF-FULL: Only God measures night and day exactly; fronting name emphasizes exclusivity."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q05", "question": "What can they not encompass or endure?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q05/p1", "position": "They cannot calculate the night portions exactly.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (مقاتل): Muqātil says people prayed at night fearing they would fail to reach the commanded amount, so God says they cannot calculate it precisely. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): Al-Razi answers that people estimated a third by judgment and might fall slightly short of the exact divine measure, which explains the statement that they could not calculate it. | mentions 73:3 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The pronoun refers to an implied verbal noun: you cannot calculate each portion of night and day exactly, nor secure the measure by caution without great hardship. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud reports that whoever patiently and devoutly brings goods to a M
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
