<<chunk 139, part 1 of 0..1>>
uslim city and sells at the day's price is counted by God among the martyrs. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): People cannot calculate the time intervals or keep precise count of the hours. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): Only God can calculate the night and day and know their hours; placing His name first signals His exclusive power to measure them. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): The pronoun in لن تحصوه most naturally refers to the measurement of night and day, though some take it to refer to the vigil itself. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet said, “Be upright, and you will not encompass it,” cited to illustrate human inability to calculate fully. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The pronoun in 'you will not calculate it' refers to the implied act of measuring; people cannot determine the times exactly or keep every hour precisely. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (تاج المصادر): Taj al-Masadir glosses iḥṣāʾ as knowing and counting exhaustively and being able to do so. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (عبد الله بن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud says that whoever patiently brings goods from a Muslim city and sells them at the day's market price for God's reward is counted among the martyrs. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Another explanation includes spending on one's household; a hadith says food a Muslim gives himself and his family counts as charity when done with good intention. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The pronoun refers to God's measuring: people cannot precisely calculate or track the hours, so they would have to take a broad precautionary interval, which is burdensome. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (الشافعي ومالك): Another argument says omitting al-Fātiḥa without necessity forfeits an agreed extra merit and is therefore religiously blameworthy, based on the report that Muslims’ good and bad judgments count with God. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): One sense of not being able to calculate it is that people cannot precisely tally every night's hours and fractions, since day and night vary and sleep prevents discernment. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Variant readings are especially relevant to tafsir because one reading can clarify its counterpart or yield an additional meaning; different readings often expand a single verse’s meanings. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): أن and its clause fill both object positions of علم; the sense is that He knew their inability to keep count would in fact occur. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Ihsa means obtaining a measure or number and encompassing the thing. MUQATIL: People cannot calculate the exact first two-thirds, half, or third of the night. FARRA: They could not keep track of appointed times of night. TAB-FULL: Qatada takes the burden as believers' prescribed night vigil. NAHHAS: Farra says they could not keep count. MAWARDI-FULL: Dahhak says they cannot calculate half, third, or quarter. WAHIDI-BASIT: Muqatil says some prayed all night fearing error; an is reduced emphatic particle. JISHUMI: Ihsa means encompassing something by calculation. BAGHAWI-FULL: Muqatil says some prayed all night fearing wrong measure. KASHSHAF-FULL: Pronoun refers to God's measuring; people cannot track hours without burdensome precaution. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Farra and Mundhir gloss tuhsuhu as keeping count."}, {"id": "73:20/q05/p2", "position": "They cannot sustain the demanding night vigil.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (مقاتل): Muqatil says they could not endure praying two-thirds, one-third, or half of every night. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (بعضهم): Some cite لن تحصوه as evidence that people were commanded to do what they could not bear; al-Razi replies it means the task is difficult, not impossible. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 (الحسن): On the accusative reading, al-Hasan interprets تحصوه as تطيقوه, meaning to manage or bear it. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): God knew people could neither calculate the night's measure precisely nor sustain the prescribed practice. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (الحسن وسعيد بن جبير): Al-Hasan and Saʿid ibn Jubayr explain that you would not be able to sustain or measure it. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): God eternally knew that believers could not all sustain the demanding vigil; the initial command was temporary preparation for the future, and the time had now come to ease it. | mentions 73:1 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The Prophet rose, along with a group of his Companions; this shows that not everyone rose, either because the duty was not obligatory for all or because some could not endure it. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB: Lan tuhsuhu means unable to manage or endure it. TAB-FULL: Hasan says they could not bear night prayer. TAB-FULL: Sa'id says they could not sustain night prayer. TAB-FULL: Sufyan says they could not sustain night prayer. NAHHAS: Hasan and Sa'id say they could not endure vigil. MAWARDI-FULL: Hasan says worshippers cannot sustain vigil. WAHIDI-BASIT: People cannot know exact measures or sustain required vigil. BAGHAWI-FULL: Hasan says swollen feet show they could not endure or measure vigil. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Accusative fractions show people can estimate time, so inability means sustaining hard vigil. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Hasan and Ibn Jubayr gloss tuhsuhu as obeying it."}, {"id": "73:20/q05/p3", "position": "Al-Raghib defines iḥṣāʾ as collection or attainment by number.", "reasons": "BURSEVI, d. 1127 (الراغب): Al-Raghib defines iḥṣāʾ as collection or attainment by number."}, {"id": "73:20/q05/p4", "position": "The object pronoun in تحصوه refers to the night standing understood from أنك تقوم.", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The object pronoun in تحصوه refers to the night standing understood from أنك تقوم."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q06", "question": "What does God's turning toward them mean?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q06/p1", "position": "God graciously eased or lifted the measured vigil burden.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Alternatively, the phrase means no liability is imposed, or that God eased the burden. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr says the Prophet and Companions prayed at night for ten years before verse 20 came down and eased the burden. | mentions 73:20 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Here أن is the lightened form of أنَّ, meaning “He knew that it would happen.” QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The particle an is a lightened form of the emphatic particle; exact calculation was beyond them, since exceeding the measure would burden them and falling short would distress them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Since tawba means return, the phrase describes a return from heavy obligation to relief and from hardship to ease. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): “An” is lightened from the emphatic particle, the sīn replaces its shadda, and its subject is omitted. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (الحسن وابن جبير): Al-Hasan and Ibn Jubayr take لن تحصوه to mean you cannot sustain it; God eased the burden out of mercy because they could not endure the extensive vigil, not because He lacked knowledge of its measure. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): A ṭāʾifah is a group whose members are suited to gathering around the Prophet and turning toward one another. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Tāba ʿalaykum is a metaphorical extension from accepting repentance to granting a dispensation; tabʿah means the harm that follows an act. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): God's turning toward them means He permits them to leave the prescribed vigil and lifts its burden; this is a metaphor comparing permission to acceptance of repentance. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (سعيد): Sa‘id reports that the Prophet and a group of companions continued the commanded vigil for ten years, until this passage was revealed and lightened the duty. | mentions 73:2 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): تاب is metaphorical for withholding blame before a lapse occurs: anticipated shortfall resembles an actual sin, so language of repentance describes the lifting of liability. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Here God's tawba toward people means His merciful turning to them through easing the burden. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (author): With the verb tāba, the preposition ʿalā gives the sense “to turn to someone graciously.” MUQATIL: God eased the earlier command to rise most of the night. IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL: God knew they could neither calculate nor sustain the vigil, so allowed feasible night prayer without fixed duration. TAB-FULL: God knew worshippers could not sustain vigil and eased the obligation. NAHHAS: God turned them toward ease; tawba means returning. MAWARDI-FULL: God lightened the obligation. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ibn Abbas says God excused uncomprehended amounts. WAHIDI-BASIT: Muqatil says God passed over them by easing duty. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: God eased a vigil people could not sustain. KASHSHAF-FULL: God licensed leaving vigil and removed liability, as 2:187. IBNATIYYA-FULL: God turned them from burden to feasible recitation."}, {"id": "73:20/q06/p2", "position": "God pardoned their prior shortfall.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Fatā ʿalaykum can mean God pardoned them, implying they had left some of what was commanded; it can also mean He turned from imposing the prayer when they could not bear it. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): The wording recalls 2:187, which similarly says God turned toward them and pardoned them. | mentions 2:187 MAWARDI-FULL: God pardoned earlier shortcomings and directed feasible recitation. WAHIDI-BASIT: God turned to them with pardon and relief. BAGHAWI-FULL: God returned with pardon and relief."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
