<<chunk 140, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "73:20/q07", "question": "What does the command to recite what is easy require?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q07/p1", "position": "One hundred verses are the manageable amount.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the manageable amount is one hundred verses. TABRISI, d. 548 (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says whoever reads one hundred verses in a night will not have the Qurʾan litigate against him. TABRISI, d. 548 (كعب): Kaʿb says reading one hundred verses in a night counts a person among the devout. TABRISI, d. 548 (السدي): Al-Suddī says the amount is two hundred verses. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): One view takes the command literally as Qurʾān recitation during night prayer; al-Suddī specifies one hundred verses. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says someone who recites one hundred verses in a night will not have the Qurʾān plead against him. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (كعب): Kaʿb says one who recites one hundred verses at night is recorded among the devout; al-Qurṭubī prefers this report’s view. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (النبي): A report from ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAmr says ten verses keep a worshipper from being counted heedless, one hundred make him devout, and one thousand make him among the muqaṇṭarīn; al-Qurṭubī cites it to support Kaʿb’s hundred-verse view. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the amount is one hundred verses. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (السدي): Al-Suddi says the amount is two hundred verses. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (أبو هريرة): Abū Hurayra reports that reciting one hundred verses at night keeps one from being counted among the heedless, and two hundred makes one among the devout. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس): A report attributed to the Prophet through Ibn Abbas interprets the manageable recitation as one hundred verses; Ibn Kathir later calls this report very strange and says he found it only in al-Tabarani’s collection. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (عبد الله بن عمرو بن العاص): The Prophet said that praying with ten verses removes heedlessness, one hundred marks devotion, and one thousand brings the rank of the richly rewarded; Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah, and Ibn Hibban transmit it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (ابن عباس): A report from the Prophet glosses what is easy to recite as one hundred verses. ITQAN, d. 911 (النبي): Al-Ṭabarānī reports from Ibn ʿAbbās that the Prophet interpreted “recite what is easy of it” as one hundred verses; Ibn Kathīr calls the report very strange. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): One report promises a special merit for reciting one hundred verses in a night; the quoted reward wording is unclear in the source text. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (النبي): Ibn Abi Hatim, al-Tabarani, and Ibn Mardawayh report from Ibn Abbas that the Prophet explained what is easy as one hundred verses. STUDYQURAN (some): Some held that those who know the Quran should still recite at least fifty or one hundred verses. FARRA: The manageable recitation is one hundred verses or more. TAB-FULL: Suddi says the amount is one hundred verses. TAB-FULL: Hasan says one hundred nightly verses keep the Quran from arguing against the reader. TAB-FULL: Ka'b says one hundred verses count a person among worshippers. IBNABIHATIM: Ibn Abbas reports the Prophet explained feasible recitation as one hundred verses. MAWARDI-FULL: Suddi sets two hundred verses. MAWARDI-FULL: Ibn Abbas sets one hundred verses. WAHIDI-BASIT: Hasan and Suddi identify one hundred verses. KASHSHAF-FULL: Alternative literal recitation of fifty or one hundred verses, with hundred-verse merit reports."}, {"id": "73:20/q07/p2", "position": "Recitation stands for manageable night prayer.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): One view takes recitation to mean prayer, naming the whole by one of its parts, since Quranic recitation is part of prayer. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): Al-Qurṭubī prefers actual recitation because it follows the apparent wording; taking it as prayer is figurative, naming the whole act by one of its parts. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The phrase means people cannot know the exact measure or fulfill it; an alternative says they cannot endure night prayer, but the first is stronger because the whole night was never imposed. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): It may mean perform whatever night prayer is easy, with Qurʾān naming prayer by one of its pillars; another view says the phrase means recite the Qurʾān itself as easily as possible. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (قيل): Some interpret “the Qurʾān” here as prayer, because recitation is one of its pillars; the command is to pray what night prayer is manageable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): Reciting what is easy can stand for prayer because recitation is one of its pillars, like standing, bowing, and prostration; it means pray at night as much as manageable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (author): If this means recitation within prayer, the apparent rule is that any recitation that is easy and manageable suffices. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): God knew the believers could not keep exact count of the required night portion, so He eased the duty and allowed whatever recitation is manageable, meaning night prayer without a fixed duration. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): Recitation here stands for prayer, as in 17:110, where not raising one’s voice in prayer means not raising it in recitation. | mentions 17:110 BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): The phrase means perform whatever night prayer is easy, without a fixed fraction of the night; even a brief amount counts, perhaps four or two rakʿahs. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Recitation names the whole prayer by one of its parts, a metonymic use of part for whole. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): On the contextual reading, recitation stands for night prayer through one of its constituent acts; literal Qur'an recitation is less fitting to context. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (أبو حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa infers that any Qurʾānic recitation fulfills the prayer requirement, since recitation can stand for prayer; the minimum is reported as one verse by al-Māwardī or a third by Ibn al-ʿArabī. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Müfessirînden birçokları): Many exegetes take recitation as a part-for-whole reference to prayer, since recitation is one of its pillars, and understand the command as praying at night as much as is easy. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): He preserves the literal sense of Qur'an as recitation while retaining prayer: the earlier command means rise for prayer, and here the easy Quranic portion is read within that prayer; the easing is conveyed by context. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): If it means Quran recitation alone, then some Quran must be recited every night, whether during prayer or outside it. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): If معك means figurative association, fellowship, and agreement rather than physical attendance at night prayer, the group includes several Companions and Zaynab bint Jaḥsh, whose night-prayer reports occur separately in Sahih al-Bukhari. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): فاقرؤوا ما تيسر من القرآن means perform as much prayer as is manageable, since prayer necessarily includes recitation. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (müfessirler): One interpretation takes “recite what is easy” to mean praying as much tahajjud as is easy during the night. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Ebû Bekir İbnü’l-Arabi): Ibn al-Arabi reports both that “recitation” stands for prayer and that the passage means recitation itself. MAWARDI-FULL: Prayer is called Quran because it contains recitation."}, {"id": "73:20/q07/p3", "position": "Fifty verses are the manageable amount.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (قيل): Another view sets the amount at fifty verses. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سعيد): Saʿīd says the amount is fifty verses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (ابن جبير وجماعة): Ibn Jubayr and a group regard it as obligatory, requiring at least fifty verses. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): A further report specifies fifty verses as a measure of nightly recitation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Diğer bir kısım müfessirîn): Another group takes the imperative as ordinary Quran recitation, not night prayer, and says at least fifty verses should be read each night. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Mutlak kıraat mânasına hamledenler): Exegetes who take this as unrestricted recitation appeal to customary practice and the predecessors' habit to set a minimum of fifty verses. TAB-FULL: Hasan condemns a memorizer neglecting night recitation and says fifty verses suffice. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Ibn Jubayr's group requires fifty verses. TABRISI: Sa'id ibn Jubayr says manageable amount is fifty verses."}, {"id": "73:20/q07/p4", "position": "Recite a manageable portion of Qur'an in prayer.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (author): The instruction is to recite whatever is manageable in prayer, without setting a fixed duration. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (İmâm-ı A‘zam Ebû Hanîfe): One report from Abu Hanifa sets the minimum obligatory recitation in prayer at one short verse. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The phrase concerns as much night prayer as manageable, not the minimum Quranic recitation required in prayer; even if read as recitation, the amount is unspecified here and clarified by the hadith requiring al-Fātiḥa. STUDYQURAN (author): God relented by reducing the vigil requirement and letting them recite as much Quran in prayer as was easy. MAWARDI-FULL: Recitation in prayer is obligatory. MAWARDI-FULL: Malik and Shafi'i require full Opening Sura in prayer. WAHIDI-BASIT: Muqatil says recite manageable Quran in prayer without a fixed amount. BAGHAWI-FULL: Recite manageable Quran in prayer; Hasan specifies Maghrib and Isha."}, {"id": "73:20/q07/p5", "position": "The Fātiḥa is required in prayer.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (مالك والشافعي): Malik and al-Shafi'i require reciting the Fatiha in prayer; neither leaving it for another passage nor reciting only part suffices. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The author endorses Malik and al
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
