<<chunk 142, part 2 of 0..3>>
r good one can; its final phrase derives from 73:20. | mentions 73:20 ISLAHI-TADABBUR (author): Alongside the other duties, believers should seek forgiveness for their faults and hope for God’s forgiveness and mercy. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Since people cannot avoid mistakes despite their care in worldly life, the sūra ends by commanding them to ask God's forgiveness. MUQATIL: Seek forgiveness for sins; God forgives askers and grants the concession mercifully. TAB-FULL: Ask God to forgive sins. NAHHAS: Seek forgiveness for sins and shortcomings; God forgives repentant people. SULAMI: Seek forgiveness in every circumstance. MAWARDI-FULL: Seek forgiveness for sins. WAHIDI-BASIT: Seek forgiveness for sins. WAHIDI-WAJIZ: Ask forgiveness; God forgives believers and shows mercy. JISHUMI: Seeking forgiveness and repentance are always obligatory due to common shortcomings. BAGHAWI-FULL: Ask forgiveness for sins; God forgives and shows mercy. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Some derive forgiveness seeking after prayer from verse and 51:17. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Author's father sought forgiveness three times after each obligatory prayer, citing hadith. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Post-prayer forgiveness repairs thoughts and shortcomings in prayer. IBNATIYYA-FULL: Early pious prayed to dawn then sought forgiveness until morning prayer."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q18", "question": "What do God's forgiveness and mercy entail?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q18/p1", "position": "God forgives and shows mercy to those who seek Him.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Seeking forgiveness means asking God to forgive; He covers sins, pardons, and shows mercy. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (مقاتل): Muqatil holds that God is forgiving of all sins, including those of persistent sinners; the wording includes both repentant and persistent sinners, and forgiveness limited to penitents would be an obligatory act rather than praise. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The final description means God forgives believers' sins and is merciful to them. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (سعيد بن جبير): Sa'id ibn Jubayr says God forgives what preceded repentance and shows mercy to people afterward. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (author): God is forgiving and merciful. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): God is merciful by easing matters for those who exert themselves in worship. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): God's forgiveness covers sins and their effects until no blame or punishment remains; His mercy then adds generous honor and favor. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Ghafur forgives sins other than associating partners with God, while Rahim turns bad deeds into good deeds. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (عين المعاني): Ayn al-Maʻani glosses Ghafur as covering the failings of the ignorant and negligent, and Rahim as easing their burden. TAB-FULL: God forgives repentant servants and mercifully does not punish them. MAWARDI-FULL: God forgives what preceded repentance. MAWARDI-FULL: Sa'id says God shows mercy after repentance. WAHIDI-BASIT: Muqatil says God forgives and has mercy on believers. WAHIDI-BASIT: Ibn Abbas says God forgives those not persisting in sin."}]}
{"id": "73:20/q19", "question": "When and where was this closing passage revealed?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q19/p1", "position": "The closing passage was revealed in Mecca.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): Another view says prayer and zakat were already obligatory in Mecca, so the verse is Meccan. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عمر): Ibn Umar found a Meccan youth who regularly attended the mosque selling food; he urged him toward livestock, saying food sellers welcome scarcity while herders welcome rain. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): The dual and third fractions are accusative for Makkan and Kufan readers, linked to adnā; those reading them genitive link them to “two thirds.” IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (author): God foreknows that illness, travel for livelihood, and fighting in His path will excuse some Muslims from night vigil; since this Meccan surah preceded legislation of fighting, the prediction is a sign of prophethood. ITQAN, d. 911 (ابن الغرس): Ibn al-Ghars reports a view that the passage beginning “Your Lord knows” through the end of al-Muzzammil is Meccan. | mentions 73:20 ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Al-Suyuti rejects the view that the ending is Meccan, citing Aisha's report that it was revealed later when night prayer was made obligatory. | mentions 73:20 ITQAN, d. 911 (author): Al-Suyuti prefers the agreed Meccan example: the night prayer commanded at the start of al-Muzzammil was abrogated by its end or by the five daily prayers. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAtiyya says the majority considered the sura Makkan except 73:20 to its end; al-Qurtubi attributes the same view to al-Thaʿlabi. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (صاحب الإتقان): The Itqan author cites al-Hakim from ʿAʾisha: the ending was revealed a year after the opening, when night vigil had been imposed before the five prayers, implying the whole sura was Makkan. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (عائشة): Some of ʿAʾisha's reports imply the entire sura is Makkan and its ending came a year after its opening, before obligatory prayer, as transmitted by al-Hakim via the Itqan author. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Early authorities differed over when and where this verse was revealed and how its ruling relates to the preceding verse; the trusted view is that the opening was Makkan. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Reports place this Meccan verse eight months, a year, or ten years after the sura's opening verses. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): The claim that Meccan zakat was imposed without specifying thresholds is unsupported."}, {"id": "73:20/q19/p2", "position": "The closing passage was revealed in Medina.", "reasons": "BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Since the Prophet was present when this verse was revealed, the travelers were not leaving him for instruction; if the surah's ending is Medinan, they could instead be migrating to Medina for learning. The rule also serves later generations. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (من فسرها بالزكاة المفروضة): Those who read this as obligatory zakat regard the sura's final passage as Medinan, treating its ruling as one whose legislation followed its revelation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (أبو حيان): Some scholars call the verse Medinan; Abu Hayyan describes that as the majority position, but Elmalılı says it does not appear to be the majority view. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): Elmalılı considers the mention of fighting a clearer sign that at least one or two clauses are Medinan: permission to fight was agreed to be Medinan, and even the prediction of fighters preparatorily signals that permission and its abrogating circumstances. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The author prefers a Medinan date for 73:20 onward because it mentions fighting in God's path, unless this predicts the unseen miraculously. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): That account implies a wholly Medinan sura: ʿAʾisha lived with the Prophet in Medina, and his angry exit suggests he left his home for its adjoining mosque; other reports support mosque prayer. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The discussion from this point concerns the portion of the sura revealed in Medina, as stated in the introduction. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The author rejects al-Tabari's report from Abu Salama ibn ʿAbd al-Rahman from ʿAʾisha, and the similar report from al-Nakhaʿi about the blanket, as evidence that the opening was Medinan. | mentions 73:1 TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Prayer followed by obligatory zakat and distinguished from voluntary charity suggests zakat here is obligatory, which was instituted in Medina after the Hijra. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Mentioning fighting would not suit the early mission's circumstances, so the verse is apparently Medinan; some others also favor this dating. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (many commentators): Many commentators infer that all of verse 20 was revealed at Medina because fighting in God's cause was sanctioned only after the Hijrah. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (Ibn Kathir): Ibn Kathir reads the future-tense wording as a prediction of later circumstances, the interpretation Asad adopts against the Medinan dating. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (author): Asad rejects the dating inference as unwarranted: the future tense predicts later circumstances, although jihad was first sanctioned in Medina. ASAD-NOTES, d. 1412 (some authorities): Some authorities call verse 20 Medinan; Asad says this claim has no substance. ISLAHI-TADABBUR (author): Though its subject indicates a Madinan revelation, the final verse returns to the night-prayer directive at the sūrah’s beginning, linking its opening and close; this arrangement reflects guidance from God and His Prophet. | mentions 73:1 STUDYQURAN (some): Some infer from the mention of fighting that this verse dates from the Medinan period, since fighting began there."}, {"id": "73:20/q19/p3", "position": "One view says the verse is Medinan because prayer and zakat were not made obligatory in Mecca.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (author): One view says the verse is Medinan because prayer and zakat were not made obligatory in Mecca."}, {"id": "73:20/q19/p4", "position": "The obligatory alms are understood as zakat; another view takes the reference as zakat al-fitr, since formal zakat was not yet prescribed in Mecca, and those reading it as obligatory zakat infer that the surah's ending…", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The obligatory alms are understood as zakat; another view takes the reference as zakat al-fitr, since formal zakat was not yet prescribed in Mecca, and those reading it as obligatory zakat infer that the surah's ending is Medinan."}, {"id": "73:20/q19/p5", "position": "Some say the duty lasted beyond the Hijra and was abrogated in Medina, since fighting was prescribe
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
