<<chunk 143, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "73:20/q20", "question": "How does the passage change the earlier night vigil duty?", "turns_on": "The sources differ in the readings, referents, chronology, legal scope, or explanation shown by the positions.", "positions": [{"id": "73:20/q20/p1", "position": "The night vigil obligation ended and the practice became voluntary.", "reasons": "TABRISI, d. 548 (الجبائي): Al-Jubbāʾī says God made night prayer voluntary rather than obligatory. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (author): The stated reason did not apply to the Prophet, whose daytime remained spacious according to 73:7, so the night-vigil obligation was not abrogated for him. | mentions 73:7 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Some scholars say this command abrogated the fixed night standing, including its half-night amount and permitted increase or decrease. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (بعض العلماء): Those scholars offer two possibilities: this command imposed a new duty replacing the old one, or it was itself later abrogated by 17:79, where night vigil is called a voluntary extra for the Prophet. | mentions 17:79 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الشافعي): Al-Shafi'i held that the obligation of night prayer was abrogated altogether, so it is not obligatory. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قوم): Some held that the complete abrogation also covered the Prophet, and that calling the prayer a nafl means a genuinely voluntary act. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas said that when the Messenger arrived, the verse ended the obligation of night prayer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (ابن عباس، وعكرمة، ومجاهد، والحسن، وقتادة): These early authorities say the final verse abrogated the original obligation of night vigil; reports differ on how long that first obligation lasted. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): God lifted the earlier obligation of precisely measured night vigil and licensed people to leave it without blame. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 (author): Recitation stands for prayer because it is prayer's greatest pillar, indicating that night vigil is recommended rather than obligatory. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (قتادة): Qatada says night vigil was initially obligatory; Companions stood until their feet swelled. After a year this passage abrogated that duty, while prayer and zakat remained obligatory without concession. DURR-FULL, d. 911 (عكرمة): Ikrima says they continued for a year, suffering hardship and swollen feet, until the end of the sūra abrogated the initial night-vigil command. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): Night vigil was initially obligatory under the stated options; because it became difficult, this verse abrogated its fixed measure with an easier allowance. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (قيل): A proposed answer says the original order was for the lesser amount, while the companions voluntarily exceeded it as a precaution; God knew the hardship and then abrogated that command, but the author says the issue still needs examination. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): On the literal recitation reading, God permits leaving all night prayer but commands some Qur'an recitation at night as an easier practice with the reward of vigil; this command is recommended rather than obligatory. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (بعضهم): Some say the duty remained obligatory while the amount was optional, then was abrogated after ten years; al-Kalbi says a man might pray until dawn for fear of misjudging the interval. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (غير واحد): Some hold the vigil was voluntary, citing the choice of amounts and 17:79, which calls night prayer a special additional devotion for the Prophet. | mentions 17:79 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reports that night prayer ceased to be obligatory for the Prophet’s companions and became voluntary, while remaining obligatory for the Prophet. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (Bir kısım müfessirîn): Some say this meant the evening and night prayers, with the obligation of tahajjud lifted and left voluntary and discretionary. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): If this first command means prayer, its obligation too is abrogated by the later recitation and establish-prayer commands. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (عائشة): A report from Aisha says the verse came eight months after the opening command, restored the originally near-obligatory night vigil to its basic prescribed amount, abrogated the extra burden, and left the excess voluntary. | mentions 73:2 ELMALILI, d. 1361 (الحسن): Hasan reports that Muslims kept night vigil for a year, with some able to do so and others unable, until the concession came; after an obligation, the vigil became voluntary worship. | mentions 73:2 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (العلماء): Scholars address the difficulty in the seven-ahruf hadith through two approaches: some regard it as abrogated, others as still operative. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Night prayer is established as recommended for Muslims; scholars disagree whether its obligation continued for the Prophet, a question the author says need not be pursued. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says only 73:20 abrogated the night vigil. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): Night prayer was not made obligatory, or its obligation was lifted, because widespread excuses make it burdensome; a general presumption of hardship can remove obligation where individuals otherwise might receive only temporary exemptions. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The juxtaposition suggests that the five obligatory prayers discharge believers’ duty, while night prayer is voluntary and greatly beneficial; many transmitted reports support this. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (author): Night vigil is recommended for other believers, although the address to the Prophet appears obligatory. TABATABAI, d. 1402 (القوم): Commentators also disagree whether the easing abrogated the earlier ruling or changed the commanded prayer into reciting what is manageable. ABUDAWUD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the command to stand most of the night in 73:2–3 was abrogated by 73:20’s concession to recite what is easy. | mentions 73:2, 73:3 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Illness, travel for livelihood or other purposes, and jihad for defense, freedom, or independence bring divine ease; night prayer becomes recommended rather than obligatory."}, {"id": "73:20/q20/p2", "position": "The five daily prayers superseded the earlier night vigil duty.", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 (المفسرون): The commentators say the night vigil requirement for Muslims was abrogated by the five daily prayers. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 (آخرون): Others say night vigil was abrogated in stages: first this verse replaced its obligation with an easier amount, then the five daily prayers replaced that duty. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī says Sunnah must resolve the two possibilities and finds that the Prophet’s Sunnah establishes no obligatory prayer beyond the five daily prayers. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (author): The command means to pray whatever is possible: an accessible amount of night prayer was first required, then abrogated when the five daily prayers were prescribed. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 (قيل): One reported account says the earlier option made night vigil obligatory, this verse abrogated that obligation when it became difficult, and the five daily prayers later abrogated this ruling. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 (author): This command abrogated the first night-prayer command, and the five daily prayers later abrogated it. | mentions 73:2 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 (قيل): One view says this command abrogated the earlier one, and both were later abrogated by the five daily prayers. BURSEVI, d. 1127 (author): This ending relaxed the prescribed night portions while retaining night prayer as obligatory as possible; the obligation itself was later superseded by the five daily prayers, since adding duties beyond five is an addition. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): On the prayer reading, God first required a specified portion of night vigil, then an unspecified portion; both commands were obligatory, before the five daily prayers abrogated the obligation for the community. | mentions 73:2 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (مقاتل وابن كيسان): Muqatil and Ibn Kaysan say tahajjud was obligatory in Mecca before the five prayers, then abrogated by them except for voluntary prayer; al-Bukhari and Muslim report this from Jabir. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 (author): Al-Ālūsī prefers the view that some night prayer was first obligatory, then its obligation for the community was abrogated by the five daily prayers; it remains Sunnah for them. ELMALILI, d. 1361 (author): The verse reduces the severity and amount of the opening night-vigil duty; after the five daily prayers became obligatory, evening and night prayers remained within the night vigil, while tahajjud changed from obligatory to recommended. | mentions 73:2 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The opening certainly came in Mecca, while 73:20 to the end came in Medina years later and abrogated the Prophet's duty; ʿAʾisha's claim that vigil preceded the five prayers is anomalous. | mentions 73:1, 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The five prayers did not abrogate the Prophet's night vigil; rather, “recite what is easy” removed the requirement to spend half the night or slightly less. | mentions 73:20 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 (author): The first obligation on the community was the five prayers imposed on the Night Journey; if an earlier communal prayer existed, the Miʿraj account would mention its replacement, and the five were equally obligatory on the Prophet."}, {"id": "73:20/q20/p3", "position": "Night prayer was voluntary from the outset.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 (قوم): One account says the required amount was first abrogated, then the remaining duty was ended by the prescribed prayer times; extra prayers beyond the five are voluntary. | mentions 17:78, 30:17 IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 (عائشة): Aisha reports that night vigil was initially obligatory; the Prophet and companions kept it for a year until their feet swelled, then the surah’s ending eased the duty to voluntary p
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
