<<chunk 5, part 2 of 0..5>>
hich also reports deprivation and observes that the senses are close. Qurtubi says loss, destruction, punishment, evil and deficiency are close in meaning."}, {"id": "103:2/q07/p5", "position": "The lost capacity to serve God and attain spiritual nearness.", "reasons": "Razi says deprivation of serving the Lord is the central loss, beside which Paradise and Hell are secondary, citing 51:56. Qushayri distinguishes deeds whose loss is evident at the end from present loss of states: contraction after expansion, veiling after nearness and resort to concessions after a higher path. Qashani and Study Quran describe losing innate guidance or attachment to God."}, {"id": "103:2/q07/p6", "position": "Decline of bodily strength with age, while believers' earlier deeds keep being recorded.", "reasons": "Ibrahim is transmitted by Thalabi, Bagawi and Qurtubi, who compare 95:4–6; Study Quran also reports a historical reading in which later generations decline from earlier ones. Ibn Atiyya adds that believers' age and worldly hardship are forgiven beside everlasting afterlife profit."}, {"id": "103:2/q07/p7", "position": "Loss in both worldly life and the Hereafter, culminating in loss of dignity and the soul.", "reasons": "Study Quran cites 35:39, 22:11 and 39:15, noting that a person may lose what is dear without material poverty. Qutb makes earthly profit negligible beside God's pleasure, Paradise and human dignity; Abu Hayyan calls losing both worlds the greatest loss. Ibn Atiyya says this is clearest in a disbeliever and calls it manifest loss."}, {"id": "103:2/q07/p8", "position": "An adverse afterlife outcome rather than a verdict on worldly fortune.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿĀshūr says trade loss metaphorically names the bad end awaiting one who expects bliss; the warning concerns the future, especially the eternal afterlife, not worldly turns of fortune (3:196–197)."}]}
{"id": "103:2/q08", "question": "Why does ordinary human life tend toward loss?", "turns_on": "How finite life and human choices produce loss or enduring gain.", "positions": [{"id": "103:2/q08/p1", "position": "Life and time are finite capital; misuse or failure to earn lasting good spends them irretrievably.", "reasons": "Bagawi calls self and lifetime the greatest capital. Razi says sin, permissible activity and even incomplete worship miss enduring gain; Elmalili compares every breath to an entrusted loan and cites 25:62, 53:39 and 52:21. Poems about each passing day, his elegy and the image of death consuming life sharpen the point. Tabatabai calls earthly life a test (13:26; 21:35) in which belief and deeds determine the afterlife (53:39–41; 30:44; 41:46). Islahi stresses rapidly consumed life. Bint al-Shati's broad al-insan usage is distinguished from al-nas and jinn contexts. Baydawi and Alusi say people spend life in pursuits that yield no afterlife benefit; Alusi adds possible harm at resurrection. Biqai stresses attachment to the passing present."}, {"id": "103:2/q08/p2", "position": "Human desire, distraction and frailty draw people away from lasting good.", "reasons": "Sulami mentions neglect of God's rights, following desires and lack of fear. Razi says the afterlife's rewards are hidden whereas sensory appetites and anger draw people toward the visible world; Elmalili reports this. Biqai cites human injustice and ignorance (33:72) and notes that only a few are preserved from these defects. Qutb applies the loss to communities without righteous authority. Biqai describes loss as driven by whims, personal aims and delusion about what passes away; Ibn al-Zubayr connects innate injustice and ignorance in 33:72."}, {"id": "103:2/q08/p3", "position": "A person can turn life's expense into profit by using the present for faith, obedience and the afterlife.", "reasons": "Abu Hayyan contrasts trading away the afterlife for this world with buying it through this world. Elmalili reports the Sufi call to be the child of the moment and distinguishes it from worldly pleasure seeking; a final righteous act may compensate past waste. He denies the poem's blaming of time, locating corruption in human conduct. Qutb stresses the enduring stakes. Kashshaf describes the righteous as buying the afterlife with this world and gaining happiness; Abu Hayyan says the reverse transaction is the greatest loss."}]}
{"id": "103:2/q09", "question": "Who escapes loss, and to what extent?", "turns_on": "Whether exemption requires all four traits and whether a believer's sinful or incomplete action still entails a degree of loss.", "positions": [{"id": "103:2/q09/p1", "position": "The complete exception requires faith, righteous deeds, and mutual counsel in truth and patience.", "reasons": "Muhammad ibn Kaʿb says belief alone is insufficient and lists the successive conditions. Muqatil says those who do these things remain in the Gardens; Elmalili calls the four complete faith; Qutb calls them the single successful path in every age and the basis of a community. Al-Shafiʿi and others regard the surah as sufficient guidance. Tabari and Hasan compare another connected exception with this one. Ibn Qutayba says those who believe, do good and counsel truth and patience are not diminished."}, {"id": "103:2/q09/p2", "position": "Believers who do righteous deeds are exempted from the loss.", "reasons": "Mujahid identifies the excepted believers; Muqatil and Thalabi also name belief and deeds. Razi says believers gain enduring happiness with their self and time. Ibn Ashur says good believers avoid loss when they do no opposite deed or repent; al-salihat includes commanded good and avoidance of sin. Islahi says deeds show faith has taken root, cites 4:136, and explains their outward, inward, worldly, religious, individual and collective scope through Farahi. Ibn Atiyya says believers' temporary hardship is forgiven beside lasting success; Ibrāhīm says their youthful deeds continue to be credited in decline."}, {"id": "103:2/q09/p3", "position": "Sinful believers incur a lesser, possibly temporary loss, though faith ultimately saves them.", "reasons": "Biqai distinguishes denial from losses proportionate to disobedience. Elmalili rejects the Murji'a claim that faith without action entails no loss; sinful believers whose evil outweighs good may experience Hell until cleansed. Ibn Ashur distinguishes eternal loss through denial from graded lesser losses and cites 11:114 on forgiveness of minor sins. Samarrai says mutual counsel prevents loss of further reward. Alusi says one outside the exception need not face eternal Fire: an unpardoned sinner may enter Fire, while a pardoned one may lose higher ranks. He calls other, unspecified replies offered by al-Maturidi strained."}, {"id": "103:2/q09/p4", "position": "Faith without action incurs no loss.", "reasons": "Elmalili attributes this to the Murji'a and explicitly rejects it in favor of graded loss for disobedient believers."}]}
{"id": "103:2/q10", "question": "How is the oath by time related to the human loss that follows?", "turns_on": "Whether the oath evokes life's finite capital, the late hour and reckoning, or time's warning events.", "positions": [{"id": "103:2/q10/p1", "position": "Time is the valuable, vanishing opportunity in which human gain or loss is determined.", "reasons": "Elmalili says time contains changes, wonders, blessing, harm and the chance to act; its passing consumes life unless used for faith and reform. He says the oath honors time rather than blaming it, and its senses of restraint and bestowal evoke both loss and gain. Kuranyolu similarly says God swears by precious time; Islahi relates it to responsibility for life's blessing. Baydawi says the oath indirectly denies that time causes loss; Alusi places responsibility on people amid time's blessings and opposites, while calling an identification of ʿasr with dahr unclear. Biqai associates ʿasr with time's essence and the extraction of essences."}, {"id": "103:2/q10/p2", "position": "Late afternoon evokes the closing human era or the end of life and the reckoning of what was earned.", "reasons": "Elmalili evokes creation late in the world's day, the era of Muhammad and the sorrow of returning without gain. Study Quran reads humanity in a final historical phase. Robinson relates the afternoon to merchants counting daily takings; Corpus Coranicum supports this through Q 104's contrast of wealth and damnation."}, {"id": "103:2/q10/p3", "position": "Time's calamities and transformations warn that human loss continues to its end.", "reasons": "Elmalili explains Ali's interpretive dehr recitation as recurrent changes and calamities, while another view sees time's wonders as signs of the Creator's power. Tabari and Mawardi report Ali's reading of the oath as time's vicissitudes."}, {"id": "103:2/q10/p4", "position": "An oath-to-assertion link should be tested rather than inferred from analogy alone.", "reasons": "Bint al-Shati questions proposed links elsewhere: between the greatness of night and day and differing human striving, and between the falling star (53:1) and the Prophet's freedom from error. This note offers a methodological caution, not a specific alternative account of al-ʿAsr."}]}
{"id": "103:2/q11", "question": "What is the verse's relation to nearby sūras and other passages?", "turns_on": "Which nearby warning or parallel supplies the strongest context for the verse.", "positions": [{"id": "103:2/q11/p1", "position": "It follows al-Takāthur's warning that worldly rivalry wastes life and obscures future accountability.", "reasons": "Abu Hayyan links 102:1,3 to distinction between believers and unbelievers. Ibn al-Zubayr, as quoted by Biqai, says accumulation narrows sight to the present; Biqai also connects human ignorance, ingratitude and imagined immortality across 100:6, 103:2 and 104:3. Elmalili, Islahi and Study Quran likewise link 102:1–2,8 with time's squandered blessing. Ibn al-Zubayr also connects the exception to those whose trade does not distr
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
