<<chunk 7, part 3 of 0..5>>
negation plus jarama 'cutting': nothing cuts off the conclusion. Al-Qurtubi illustrates the root with harvesting dates, shearing wool and removing meat from bone. Al-Samin offers jarama as a noun meaning cutting or preventing. Al-Alusi extends the account to the unbroken duration of their loss. Al-Tabataba'i suggests a cutting root and concludes that nothing cuts off the assertion."}, {"id": "11:22/q01/p4", "position": "There is no uncertainty or wavering about their punishment.", "reasons": "Al-Biqa'i prefers a recurrent root idea of disturbance: reflection unsettles an opinion and opens what was closed; related forms denote doubt, confusion, sin, mixture or separation. La then negates such wavering, thereby affirming certainty; he treats the negation as emphatic and says it explains Sibawayh's 'it is true.'"}, {"id": "11:22/q01/p5", "position": "Jarama means 'became true' or 'was deserved': their unbelief makes the stated consequence rightfully certain.", "reasons": "Al-Wahidi reports al-Akhfash and Sibawayh making la a reply to the disbelievers and citing the spear-thrust poem for a consequence made certain; al-Razi also reports them. Ibn al-Anbari in Ibn al-Jawzi allows either earned punishment or made-certain punishment, with a poem for the latter. Al-Alusi reports Sibawayh's jarama as the verb haqqa, 'became true.' Al-Wahidi reports al-Farra and Abu al-Abbas objecting to the poem's use for this reading: Ghatafan is accusative, and the wound caused the tribe's anger."}]}
{"id": "11:22/q02", "question": "How are لا جرم and the following أن clause constructed?", "turns_on": "Whether the phrase is compounded, a rebuttal followed by a past verb, or a negated noun; these analyses assign different cases and syntactic roles to the following an clause.", "positions": [{"id": "11:22/q02/p1", "position": "La jarama is a fixed compound of negation and jarama meaning 'certainly'; the following an clause is nominative, as its subject.", "reasons": "Al-Khalil, Sibawayh, al-Farra and Muhammad ibn Yazid are reported by al-Nahhas and al-Qurtubi; al-Khalil says la responds to prior speech rather than opening a statement. Abu Hayyan and al-Alusi transmit al-Khalil and Sibawayh's compound analysis. Al-Samin compares its fixed form with khamsata ashar and cites 16:62. Al-Nasafi reports the compound analysis. Ibn Atiyya contrasts Sibawayh's nominative an with al-Zajjaj's accusative one. Al-Biqa'i reports a related compound-past-verb account from Sibawayh and al-Khalil."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p2", "position": "La rebuts a preceding claim; jarama is a past verb meaning 'earned,' with an implicit doer and the following an clause as its accusative object.", "reasons": "Abu Ishaq and al-Zajjaj in al-Nahhas, al-Wahidi, Ibn Atiyya, al-Qurtubi, al-Samin, al-Biqa'i and al-Alusi reject the supposed benefit and give the deed or unbelief as jarama's omitted subject. Ibn al-Anbari specifies an implicit subject referring to disbelief; al-Samin gives the deeds as subject and cites 75:1 and 4:65 for reply-like la. Abu Hayyan notes that al-Zajjaj rejects compounding and cites poetry for the earning verb. Al-Razi and al-Tabrisi explain the same rebuttal and earned loss. Al-Nasafi gives the claim as what earns the loss. Al-Alusi supplies an omitted clause such as 'their deed benefits them' and an unnamed poet for the verbal sense."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p3", "position": "La negates jarama as a noun of cutting or prevention; the an clause is its predicate or depends on an omitted preposition.", "reasons": "Al-Razi reports the negation-plus-cutting analysis. Al-Qurtubi says the agent of cutting may be omitted through frequent use. Al-Samin allows an as predicate or following an omitted preposition. Al-Alusi reports a noun of cutting off, with no interruption to their loss. Al-Kisa'i, as reported by al-Alusi, treats jarama as la's indeclinable noun, with omitted predicate and omitted preposition before an, yielding no opposition or prevention; al-Nahhas and al-Qurtubi record his no-prevention interpretation."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p4", "position": "La is an extra emphatic particle, leaving the assertion or earned outcome to follow.", "reasons": "Al-Mawardi reports extra la for the emphatic 'truly'; al-Wahidi reports an extra-la analysis in which their deed earns regret. Al-Biqa'i reports al-Radi and al-Saqafsi allowing extra la because the phrase bears oath force."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p5", "position": "La negates a genus and jarama is its accusative noun; the pair is the subject and the following an clause its predicate.", "reasons": "Al-Samin gives this analysis, with the sense 'certainly.' Abu Hayyan reports al-Hawfi taking negated jarama as a nominative topic and the an clause as predicate; al-Biqa'i reports other grammarians treating jarama as the noun of la and 'they' as predicate."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p6", "position": "The negated-noun analysis is retained, but the an clause is genitive or accusative after an omitted preposition.", "reasons": "Al-Samin gives this variant of the preceding construction, glossing it as certainty about their afterlife loss. Al-Kisa'i's analysis as reported by al-Alusi also omits a preposition before an; Ibn Ashur's fossilized-noun account likewise makes an depend on an omitted preposition."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p7", "position": "La is negative and jarama is the verb 'became true'; the following clause functions as its subject.", "reasons": "Al-Alusi reports this from Sibawayh and explains that the unbelievers' expected benefit fails because loss is certain. Al-Wahidi and al-Razi report Sibawayh and al-Akhfash with la as reply and jarama as 'deserved/was certain'; al-Wahidi records al-Farra and Abu al-Abbas objecting to their poetic proof because Ghatafan is accusative."}, {"id": "11:22/q02/p8", "position": "La jarama is a fossilized noun of inevitability, with an governed by an omitted preposition.", "reasons": "Ibn Ashur gives this construction and notes that the expression can introduce an oath-like assertion. Al-Biqa'i distinguishes fath after la jarama, reflecting the original 'no alternative that' construction, from kasra arising with later oath-like usage."}]}
{"id": "11:22/q03", "question": "What forms of لا جرم are reported?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "11:22/q03/p1", "position": "The expression has dialectal and transmitted variants in particles, vowels, and omission of final mīm.", "reasons": "Al-Kisa'i as reported by al-Nahhas and al-Qurtubi lists la jarama, la an dha jarama and la an/dha-related forms, including a Fazara form without mim. Al-Farra adds Banu Amir's la dha jarama and a damma on jim. Ibn Atiyya and Ibn al-Jawzi list la dha jarama, la an dha jarama, la an dha or la an/dha jarama, and la jar, explaining shortened la jar by frequent use. Al-Samin records different vowels, dha- and in-initial forms, and Abu Amr's la jar and a changed-rhyme form; Abu Amr likens dropped mim to shortened sawfa. Abu Hayyan notes the variants transmitted by al-Nahhas and al-Farra. Al-Alusi says inserted particles are generally extra, tentatively treats a form lacking la as needing no further assertion, and notes that lexicographers doubt the eloquent-Arabic status of some forms. Al-Biqa'i distinguishes fath from kasra through original no-alternative and later oath-like senses."}]}
{"id": "11:22/q04", "question": "Who are 'they' in this judgment?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "11:22/q04/p1", "position": "The disbelievers just described, including those who denied the afterlife and relied on fabricated objects of worship.", "reasons": "Muqatil identifies them as these unbelievers. Al-Biqa'i calls them afterlife deniers. Ibn Ashur connects the class to 11:18 and to those who lost themselves by failing to use guidance, citing 6:12; he says their claims included idol intercession and relief from hardship, with 46:28 illustrating the mockery of idols 'straying' from worshipers. Islahi says they squandered their abilities on false worship; Study Quran says fabricated idols, ideas and beliefs forsake them, citing 6:24, 6:54, 10:30, 16:87 and 28:75."}]}
{"id": "11:22/q05", "question": "What comparison does 'in the afterlife, the greatest losers' imply?", "turns_on": "Whether the superlative compares them with other afterlife inhabitants or compares their enduring afterlife loss with their worldly loss; al-Tabataba'i favors the first from the verse's apparent restriction.", "positions": [{"id": "11:22/q05/p1", "position": "Among the inhabitants of the afterlife, they are the most ruined, with no prospect of salvation while they persist in defiance.", "reasons": "Al-Tabataba'i treats the superlative as comparing them with other people there and invokes 6:12, 36:9-10 and 45:23. He prefers this reading because the verse appears to restrict the greatest losers to them in the afterlife. Al-Baghawi says all are losers but these are the greatest; al-Baydawi says no one is more plainly or greatly a loser there. Al-Alusi reads degree or amount, and Ibn Ashur says they combine forms of misery dispersed among deluded nations. Al-Samarrai contrasts these greatest losers with the losers of 16:107-108: the former also obstructed God's path and misled others, bringing multiplied punishment, while the latter preferred worldly life without that added harm to others."}, {"id": "11:22/q05/p2", "position": "Their afterlife loss exceeds their loss in this brief worldly life, since the former lasts forever; they lose both lives.", "reasons": "Al-Tabataba'i reports this as another possible comparison and cites 46:35, while preferring the comparison with afterlife inhabitants. Al-Razi says the worldly object chosen over faith perishes; Abu Hayyan distinguishes their endless loss from sinners whose punishment ends. Al-Tabataba'i also says deeds intensify through their afterlife consequences, citing 17:72; Ibn Ashur says they lose this world and the next."}]}
{"id": "11:22/q06", "question": "What does هم do in the sentence?", "turns_o
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
