<<chunk 25, part 4 of 0..5>>
): Coordination such as ya Zayd wa-ʿAmr shares the vocative particle across names; the second name is not an adjective. SIBAWAYH (author): The verse's ya ayyuhā address follows the construction illustrated by ya ayyuha al-rajulu; a coordinated name remains carried by ya. SIBAWAYH (author): A standalone singular vocative is raised like qablu and baʿdu, though it occupies an accusative position. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl also allows the adjective to be nominative as an adjective of the raised vocative. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl explains the nominative adjective by the consistent nominative marking of every isolated vocative, unlike nouns in amsi al-aḥdathu. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): An adjective that is itself annexed follows the accusative of its vocative; raising it as a standalone vocative would be ungrammatical."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q02", "question": "What transaction brought the verse down?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q02/p1", "position": "The reported occasion is the forward sale called salam.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed specifically about forward purchase of wheat by known measure and due date. JISHUMI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the verse was revealed specifically about salam sales. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-documentation verse was revealed specifically concerning forward sales (salam); Ibn ʿAṭiyya says such sales in Medina occasioned it, but the rule covers all debts by consensus. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قتادة والربيع وغيرهما): They read the summons as one to give initial testimony. The verse was revealed when a claimant sought witnesses among many people, who hesitated to come forward. TABRISI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the verse was revealed specifically concerning forward sale and testifies that God permitted a guaranteed sale to a known term. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the verse was revealed specifically about salam, an advance-purchase transaction. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the verse was revealed about forward sales: people in Medina prepaid for dates two or three years ahead, and the Prophet required known measure, weight, and term. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): He says the verse was revealed specifically about salam, prompted by the people of Medina, but by consensus it covers all deferred debt transactions. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says this concerns salam; after forbidding usury, God permitted a guaranteed advance sale for a known term and revealed the longest verse, requiring a term for salam. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-document verse was revealed specifically about forward-sale transactions in Medina; consensus extends it to all debts. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Through Mujahid, Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed concerning salam, an advance payment due at a known term. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): The verse was revealed concerning advance purchase of grain in a known measure for a known term. DURR-FULL (النبي): When people in Medina prepaid for fruit for two or three years, the Prophet required a known measure, weight, and term. ELMALILI (author): One report gives the occasion of revelation as salam, paying in advance for goods delivered later, though the ruling covers every kind of sale and debt transaction. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İbn Abbas): Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed about salam, a sale paid for in advance with goods delivered later, for example at harvest."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q03", "question": "How does the verse follow the usury prohibition?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q03/p1", "position": "The debt rule follows the usury ban by permitting and safeguarding lawful credit.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): The tribal name Ḥayy ibn Bahdalah supplies evidence for ḥayawī and for vocalizing yāʾ before wāw. SIBAWAYH (author): A preceding fatḥa or ḍamma also prevents imāla, as in ribāb, jimād, and al-balbāl. SIBAWAYH (author): Plural patterns that already have broken plural forms can be broken again as names: examples include aʿdāl to aʿādīl and aqwāl to aqāwīl, alongside abyāt, anʿām, and ajriba. THALABI (ابن عباس): When God prohibited usury, He permitted deferred sale; tadayantum means you transact debt with one another, including loans, forward sales, and other deferred obligations. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās connects the verse with God forbidding usury while permitting salam, or advance purchase on credit. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (author): After forbidding usury, God permits salam and debts; after commanding respite, he also commands fulfillment before documentation and witnesses. BAGHAWI-FULL (ابن عباس): After forbidding usury, God permitted salam, an advance purchase secured to a fixed term, in this verse. KASHSHAF-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the verse concerns salam: after usury was forbidden, advance sale for a guaranteed term was permitted and the longest verse revealed for it. RAZI-FULL (author): The detailed debt-recording rule follows commands to give charity, avoid usury, and remain mindful of God: preserving lawful wealth enables those duties and protects worldly and religious interests. | mentions 4:5 RAZI-FULL (قوم من المفسرين): Some exegetes take the debt transaction here as salam, which provides the benefits sought through usury by a lawful route; the author approves this as a second coherent link. RAZI-FULL (author): A second account of the passage’s arrangement says the ban on usury is followed by permission for salam, which offers the same desired benefits through lawful means. BAYDAWI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas says the verse concerns advance sale, which God allowed when forbidding usury. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says this concerns salam; after forbidding usury, God permitted a guaranteed advance sale for a known term and revealed the longest verse, requiring a term for salam. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): After commands to spend in God's path and leave usury, this verse offers a lawful way to grow wealth and gives detailed rules for protecting it. BURHAN (أبو عبيد القاسم بن سلام، أحمد بن يحيى ثعلب): One view takes the seven ahruf as seven Arab tribal dialects distributed across the Qur'an, not seven alternatives for each word; the dialects differ while meanings remain the same. BURHAN (ابن عبد البر): Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr argues seven tribal languages would not have prompted companions to condemn one another's readings; ʿUmar and Hisham were both Quraysh yet differed, and ʿUmar challenged Hisham. BIQAI-FULL (author): Charity and avoiding usury purify wealth while principal remains lawful and insolvent debtors receive respite; this may tempt debtors to feign insolvency, so the debt verse teaches preservation through documentation. DURR-FULL (ابن شهاب): Ibn Shihab says the last Qur'anic material with the Throne was the usury verse and the debt verse. ELMALILI (author): Any debt transaction with a specified, known due date should be written; credit trading remains permissible despite the ban on usury, provided the due date is known and documented. IBNASHUR-FULL (جماعة منهم أبو بكر الباقلائي وابن عبد البر وأبو بكر بن العربي والطبري والطحاوي): Al-Baqillani, Ibn Abd al-Barr, Ibn al-Arabi, al-Tabari, and al-Tahawi, with this view attributed to Ibn Uyayna and Ibn Wahb, hold that the seven-letter license was later abrogated after allowing tribal dialects. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو علي الاهوازي وابن عبد البر وابن قتيبة): Abu Ali al-Ahwazi, Ibn Abd al-Barr, and Ibn Qutayba restrict the seven dialects to Mudar tribes: Quraysh, Hudhayl, Kinana, Qays, Dabba, Taym al-Ribab, and Asad ibn Khuzayma. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur says Uthman’s phrase may mean Quraysh speech predominated in the Quran, or that its dialect absorbed tribal forms through Mecca’s centrality and the Ukaz market. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو عبيدة وابن عطية وأبو حاتم والباقلاني): Abu Ubayda, Ibn Atiyya, Abu Hatim, and al-Baqillani identify the seven dialects as Quraysh, Hudhayl, Taym al-Ribab, Azd, Rabi'a, Hawazin, and Sa'd ibn Bakr. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): In pre-Islamic and early Islamic practice a guardian could be a senior relative, father, trustee, or tribal notable; the Prophet told Hawāzin’s delegation to bring their ʿurafāʾ to present their case. IBNASHUR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): In the Hawāzin delegation report, the Prophet directs them to bring their tribal representatives to him, illustrating the early role of ʿurafāʾ in tribal affairs. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Because ordinary borrowing is necessary and abuse led to usury, the Qur'an permits loans and other lawful deferred contracts after forbidding interest; writing, witnesses, collateral, and trust help ensure timely full repayment and prevent forgetting or denial."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q04", "question": "Which debts and transactions does تداينتم include?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q04/p1", "position": "The wording covers deferred obligations, including sales and loans where applicable.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tadayantum covers deferred sales and purchases, lending, and other debt exchanges due at a known, fixed time; it includes loans, forward sales, and permissible sales with deferred payment. TAB-FULL (قتادة عن ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas affirms that a guaranteed forward sale with a specified term is lawful and authorized by God. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): The debt with a specified term includes an advance sale (salam) of wheat measured in a known quantity. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-documentation verse was revealed specifically concerning forward sales (salam); Ibn ʿAṭiyya says such sales in Medina occasioned it, but the rule covers all debts by consensus. TABRISI (author): Although Ibn ʿAbbās specifies forward sale, the verse's apparent scope incl
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
