<<chunk 26, part 1 of 0..5>>
antecedent", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Mentioning debt supplies the antecedent for ‘write it,’ improves the wording, and distinguishes deferred from immediate debt. RAZI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): The author of al-Kashshaf explains that bidayn supplies the antecedent for the pronoun in فاكتبوه and improves the sentence’s ordering. NASAFI-FULL (author): Mentioning debt supplies the antecedent for فاكتبوه and clarifies deferred versus immediate debt; the phrasing is more elegant than repeating الدين. BURHAN (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says debt is stated explicitly so the pronoun in write it has an antecedent."}, {"id": "2:282/q06/p3", "position": "The added debt word is emphasis", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Some call bidain mere emphasis, as in 15:30, but al-Tabari says that explanation has no merit here. | mentions 15:30 RAZI-FULL (author): The word bidayn may be emphatic, as in the Qur’anic phrases فسجد الملائكة كلهم أجمعون and ولا طائر يطير بجناحيه. | mentions 15:30, 6:38 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Adding bi-dayn may be emphatic, or it may provide the noun resumed by write it; al-Zamakhshari says it also makes clear the distinction between deferred and immediate debts."}, {"id": "2:282/q06/p4", "position": "It distinguishes financial debt from recompense", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says bidayn specifies the financial sense of tadāyantum, since the verb can also mean reciprocal recompense. BURHAN (author): Because tadaayantum can mean borrowing, sale, or reciprocal recompense, bi-dayn clarifies the intended debt sense; al-Hamasi's line illustrates the root's reciprocal sense. ALUSI-FULL (author): Tadāyantum means dealing with one another; adding bi-dayn makes explicit that the shared transaction is a debt, since the verb can also mean reciprocal recompense. Al-Alusi rejects reliance on context alone for legal clarity."}, {"id": "2:282/q06/p5", "position": "It disambiguates the transaction's debt sense", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The added phrase bidain clarifies the intended legal sense because tadayantum can mean mutual repayment or general giving and taking, not only a debt transaction. THALABI (author): Although mutual dealing can already imply debt, bidayn clarifies it because tadayun can also mean exchange or spot barter."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q07", "question": "Can a loan have a fixed term?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q07/p1", "position": "The verse does not itself settle whether a stipulated loan term binds.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Tadayantum covers deferred sales and purchases, lending, and other debt exchanges due at a known, fixed time; it includes loans, forward sales, and permissible sales with deferred payment. TAB-FULL (author): The command means to write down any debt due at a fixed term, whether it arose from a sale or a loan. THALABI (ابن عباس): When God prohibited usury, He permitted deferred sale; tadayantum means you transact debt with one another, including loans, forward sales, and other deferred obligations. THALABI (author): A specified term is a known time; write the sale, loan, or other debt to prevent denial, forgetting, or dispute. RAZI-FULL (author): Bidayn can also generalize the rule to small or large transactions and to loans, salam, or deferred sales. ALUSI-FULL (مالك): Imām Mālik uses the verse as evidence that a loan may have a deferred repayment date. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Because ordinary borrowing is necessary and abuse led to usury, the Qur'an permits loans and other lawful deferred contracts after forbidding interest; writing, witnesses, collateral, and trust help ensure timely full repayment and prevent forgetting or denial."}, {"id": "2:282/q07/p2", "position": "A loan cannot have a binding stipulated term", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Tadāyun is reciprocal dealing in debt, such as selling to one another on credit; loans are distinct from deferred debts, since classical loans cannot have a term but debts can. RAZI-FULL (أهل اللغة): The commentators distinguish a loan, which they say cannot stipulate a term, from a debt sale whose payment may be deferred; the verse’s specified term therefore points beyond a loan. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi rejects interpreting the debt as a loan because he says a loan cannot stipulate the deferred term specified in the verse."}, {"id": "2:282/q07/p3", "position": "Loans may be stipulated for a term", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): A specified term has a known beginning and end; in sale or salam it prevents the creditor demanding payment before its due date, while a loan's term is not binding according to most scholars. QURTUBI-FULL (بعض علمائنا): Some Maliki scholars infer that loans may be deferred because the verse does not distinguish loans from other debt contracts; the Shafiʿis reply that it only orders documentation of an already deferred debt and that term rules come from other evidence."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q08", "question": "How fixed must the debt's term be?", "turns_on": "Whether a natural event fixes the date sufficiently.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q08/p1", "position": "The term must be known and determinate.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says debts due at a term must be documented, while immediate hand-to-hand trades should be witnessed though writing is waived. TAB-FULL (قتادة عن ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas affirms that a guaranteed forward sale with a specified term is lawful and authorized by God. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): The debt with a specified term includes an advance sale (salam) of wheat measured in a known quantity. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): A specified term means a known term. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): All sales deferred for a short or long term must be written and witnessed until their due date. THALABI (author): A specified term is a known time; write the sale, loan, or other debt to prevent denial, forgetting, or dispute. JISHUMI (author): A specified term is a stated and known time. JISHUMI (author): The term must be known: that is the force of specified, and an unknown term defeats the purpose of writing and witnessing. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): A specified term has a known beginning and end; in sale or salam it prevents the creditor demanding payment before its due date, while a loan's term is not binding according to most scholars. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Adding “with a debt” disambiguates tadaayantum, since Arabic can use it for mutual repayment; an expressly specified term rules out an unknown maturity date. TABRISI (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the verse was revealed specifically concerning forward sale and testifies that God permitted a guaranteed sale to a known term. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Bayʿ is exchanging one item of property for another under specified terms. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The command concerns a debt due at a specified term and requires writing and witnesses to protect property and people from injustice; documented proof restrains a debtor’s temptation to deny it. RAZI-FULL (أهل اللغة): The commentators distinguish a loan, which they say cannot stipulate a term, from a debt sale whose payment may be deferred; the verse’s specified term therefore points beyond a loan. RAZI-FULL (author): An appointed term is a future time at which the period ends; its root conveys delay, and a specified debt term must be objectively known, such as by year, month, or days. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Salam is a sale of a specified, described commodity in liability for present capital or its equivalent, due at a known term. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A known term excludes spot salam, which is impermissible on the commonly held view, and excludes the pre-Islamic unknown terms. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The agreed conditions are six for the goods—liability, description, measurement, deferral, known term, and availability at maturity—and three for capital—known kind, specified measure, and cash payment, with cash status disputed. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The Prophetic wording إلى أجل معلوم settles the requirement for a known term; al-Qurṭubī allows one to three days when prices differ between towns, but not within one town where the price is stable. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن المنذر): He says إلى أجل مسمى proves salam with an unknown term is invalid, as also shown by Prophetic practice. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says this concerns salam; after forbidding usury, God permitted a guaranteed advance sale for a known term and revealed the longest verse, requiring a term for salam. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Through Mujahid, Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed concerning salam, an advance payment due at a known term. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas swears that deferred forward sale for a specified term is permitted by God and reads this verse as evidence; al-Bukhari transmits it. BIQAI-FULL (author): A debts deadline must be specified; an unknown term is invalid, and the appointment of a term hints at resurrection and fulfillment of Gods promise. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas affirms that deferred advance sales to a specified term are authorized by God, citing the debt verse. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): The verse was revealed concerning advance purchase of grain in a known measure for a known term. ELMALILI (author): Any debt transaction with a specified, known due date should be written; credit trading remains permissible despite the ban on usury, provided the due date is known and documented."}, {"id": "2:282/q08/p2", "position": "Harvest and similar events are too indefinite", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A specified term must be known; harvest, threshing, or pilgrims’ return is too indeterminate. RAZI-FULL (author): Terms such as harvest, threshing, or the pilgrims’ arrival are invalid because they do not specify a determinate date. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Salam is licensed to meet mutual needs: the buyer needs the harvest and the grower needs money before it ripens; it is a sale
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
