<<chunk 26, part 3 of 0..5>>
 person may freely relinquish the right. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Whether a fee may be charged for writing depends on whether the service is obligatory: obligatory writing permits no fee, while a nonobligatory service may be paid. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Jurayj, al-Shaʿbi, ʿAta, al-Nakhaʿi, a report from Abu Saʿid al-Khudri, Dawud, and al-Tabari hold that writing is obligatory; those requiring witnesses may also require writing. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Dört mezhebin imamlarının içinde bulunduğu çoğunluk): Most jurists, including the four school imams, and Ibn Atiyya treat the documentation measures as recommended safeguards, not binding commands. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (Taberî, Dâvûd ez-Zâhirî, Atâ): Tabari, Dawud al-Zahiri, and Ata consider the command binding: writing is obligatory and abandoning it is sinful. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Jurists differ on whether an approached scribe must write: some say it is individually obligatory, others say a collective duty when time allows; Jassas says writing itself is not obligatory, but one should teach it or find another writer to prevent rights being lost. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Whether a scribe may charge depends on whether writing is obligatory, since religious duties cannot be paid work but optional acts may be; the author deems abstention impermissible when capable writers are available, especially if no substitute exists and rights may be lost."}, {"id": "2:282/q11/p2", "position": "Writing is recommended or advisory", "reasons": "THALABI (قوم): Writing the debt is recommended and discretionary: documenting it is good, but leaving it carries no blame. MAWARDI-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري والحسن والشعبي): Writing the debt is recommended, not compulsory. JISHUMI (أبو سعيد الخدري والحسن): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī and al-Ḥasan, with most scholars, treat writing the debt as recommended. JISHUMI (author): Writing and witnessing are guidance and recommendation, not obligation, since a creditor may waive the right itself and need not document it as a precaution. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Writing is recommended because it gives stronger security against forgetting and denial. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور العلماء): Most scholars treat writing as recommended protection of property and removal of doubt; it does not harm a pious debtor and protects the creditor against an unreliable one. IBNATIYYA-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد): No particular scribe must write if another is available, and he may decline unless hired; if none is available, an exhortatory duty falls on the present person. Documentation in general is recommended, like doing good in 22:77, and helps someone in need. | mentions 22:77 TABRISI (أبو سعيد الخدري والحسن والشعبي): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī, al-Ḥasan, and al-Shaʿbī say writing the debt is recommended, the majority's preferred view. NASAFI-FULL (author): Writing a deferred debt is recommended because it better guards against forgetfulness and denial. BIQAI-FULL (author): Debt documentation is guidance rather than an obligation, modeled on Gods own recording of deeds by trustworthy angels and in a revealed book. ITQAN (author): Writing the Qur’an neatly, clearly, and precisely without undue effort is recommended; hanging a mushaf and writing it on a small object are disliked. ALUSI-FULL (author): Writing the debt with its due date is more convenient and secure; most treat the instruction as recommended in view of the later trust exception. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The majority, including Malik, Abu Hanifa, al-Shafiʿi, and Ahmad, treat writing as recommended; the trust exception in 2:283 completes that recommendation. | mentions 2:283 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): When a cash transaction is immediately completed, the writing requirement is lifted though witnesses remain recommended, because disputes can arise even without a term."}, {"id": "2:282/q11/p3", "position": "The trust clause abrogated the duty", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): A reported position holds that documentation, though originally obligatory, was later abrogated by the mutual-trust provision. TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that people treated the trust clause as abrogating prior writing and witness requirements, making them a concession and mercy. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (غير عطاء): An unnamed authority other than ʿAṭāʾ says the trust clause abrogated writing and testimony. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says the trust clause abrogated the preceding command. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī says the trust clause abrogated what preceded it in the debt passage. | mentions 2:283 IBNABIHATIM (محمد بن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq says the writing command was abrogated by the later clause allowing the entrusted debtor to discharge the trust. | mentions 2:283 THALABI (الشعبي): The debt record, witnesses, and pledge were initially obligatory, then the trust clause abrogated that requirement. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (آخرون): Others say writing, witnesses, or collateral were initially obligatory but were abrogated by the trust clause in 2:283, which permits leaving documentation when the parties trust each other. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says scholars in the Ḥijāz and Iraq agree that sale witnesses are not mandatory and that buyers can choose; they treat the following trust clause as abrogating the obligation. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing rights. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some consider writing obligatory, but most deem the command recommendatory; al-Shaʿbi says writing, witnessing, and pledging were obligatory then abrogated by the trust provision. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi holds that writing, witnessing, and pledging were initially obligatory and that the instruction to fulfill a trusted deposit abrogated all three. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس): Al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥakam, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd are reported to say that the mutual-trust clause abrogated witnessing sales. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt verse is established, not abrogated, and writing, pledges, and witnesses are alternative means of securing debt; witnessing is recommended like pledging. | mentions 2:283 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري وابن زيد والشعبي وابن جريج): They held that the trust clause abrogated the command to write; al-Rabīʿ instead says writing was first required and then eased by the trust clause. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو سعيد والشعبي والربيع بن أنس والحسن وابن جريج وابن زيد): They hold that writing transactions was initially obligatory, then abrogated by the option to trust one another and discharge the entrusted obligation in 2:283. | mentions 2:283"}, {"id": "2:282/q11/p4", "position": "Deferred debts are to be written.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (أبو إسحاق): Abu Ishaq prefers taking ولا يضار as a prohibition on the writer or witness causing harm, since the next clause calls such conduct sinful. NAHHAS (الفراء): Some say recording deferred debts and witnessing sales are recommendations, by analogy with commands that grant permission after a prohibition. | mentions 2:282 WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ regards writing and witnesses as recommendation and permission like the commands in 5:2 and 62:10: documenting is good but leaving it is harmless. | mentions 5:2, 62:10 JISHUMI (الشعبي وجماعة من المفسرين): Al-Shaʿbī and other exegetes say writing is a communal obligation, like jihad; Jishumi says this is the view followed in practice. KASHSHAF-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī regards writing as a communal obligation. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The specified term is known by days or months, not left to harvest or the pilgrims' arrival; writing is safer and most scholars recommend it. BURSEVI (author): Writing the debt and its due date is safer and prevents disputes; the majority consider the command a recommendation. ALUSI-FULL (author): If the second command repeats the earlier writing order, it emphasizes it because forbidding refusal does not explicitly command its opposite; some infer a communal obligation, but al-Alusi says this reading would impose hardship on the believers. ALUSI-FULL (الشعبي والجبائي والرماني): Al-Shaʿbī, al-Jubbāʾī, and al-Rummānī infer from 'let him write' and 'let no scribe refuse' that writing is a communal obligation; al-Ḥasan's position inclines that way. ASAD-NOTES (author): Writing down the contract means recording all rights and obligations that arise from it."}, {"id": "2:282/q11/p5", "position": "The later harm clause abrogated the scribe's duty", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): An immediate exchange of goods is exempt from writing because the risks of delayed payment are absent; witnessing spot sales is also no longer obligatory under the abrogated ruling. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He says the writer's and witness's duties were binding, then abrogated by the ban on harming either. TABRISI (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says writing was originally obligatory but was abrogated by the ban on harming a scribe or witness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الجمهور): The majority treat writing debts and witnessing sales or debts as recommended, so the command remains operative without abrogation. ALUSI-FULL (مجاهد والضحاك): Mujāhid and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say the individual scribe must write when asked; another position recommends writing, and a report from al-Ḍaḥḥāk says its original obligation was later abrogated."}, {"id": "2:282/q11/p6", "position": "The trust clause is a limited permission, not abrogation", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules th
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
