<<chunk 26, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q05", "question": "What does تداينتم mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q05/p1", "position": "Tadāyantum describes reciprocal dealings that create debt.", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): بدين reinforces تداينتم, since mutual lending already conveys debt, like سجَدَ الملائكة كلهم أجمعون. | mentions 15:30 AKHFASH (الشاعر): A rajaz line using داينت illustrates reciprocal dealing: داينتُها وداينتني yields تداينا. TAB-FULL (author): Tadayantum covers deferred sales and purchases, lending, and other debt exchanges due at a known, fixed time; it includes loans, forward sales, and permissible sales with deferred payment. TAB-FULL (author): The added phrase bidain clarifies the intended legal sense because tadayantum can mean mutual repayment or general giving and taking, not only a debt transaction. ZAJJAJ (author): داينت someone means dealing with him through a debt, giving and taking; تداينا is used similarly, while دنت and أدنت distinguish borrowing from lending. ZAJJAJ (الشاعر): An unnamed poet uses داينت ليلى for dealing with Layla in debts, then describes delay in repayment and partial payment. ZAJJAJ (author): دنت means I borrowed and أدنت means I lent; a cited poem illustrates أدان and المدان, the lender and debtor vocabulary. THALABI (ابن عباس): When God prohibited usury, He permitted deferred sale; tadayantum means you transact debt with one another, including loans, forward sales, and other deferred obligations. THALABI (author): Dayn is deferred while ʿayn is present; dāna means to lend, the lender is dā'in, and the recipient is madin or madyun. THALABI (author): Although mutual dealing can already imply debt, bidayn clarifies it because tadayun can also mean exchange or spot barter. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Tadayantum means either mutually to settle debts or to transact with one another. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Tadāyun is reciprocal dealing in debt, such as selling to one another on credit; loans are distinct from deferred debts, since classical loans cannot have a term but debts can. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Dāna may mean selling on credit, lending, borrowing, or being heavily indebted; tadayyana and istadāna mean taking debt, illustrated by poetry. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbārī explains the explicit word dayn after tadāyantum by distinguishing financial dealing from moral recompense, since dayn can mean requital too. JISHUMI (author): Al-dayn is an obligation established in the debtor's liability, and al-ajal is the appointed time, or the time's end. JISHUMI (author): Tadayantum means that people deal with one another by lending or incurring a debt. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Tadāyantum means dealing by debt; dayn specifies this sense because debt transactions may mean repayment or immediate exchange, or it is emphatic like saying a bird flies with its wings. | mentions 6:38 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The emphatic form shahidayn suggests witnesses who have testified repeatedly, implying probity. TABRISI (author): داينت and تداينت mean transacting in debt, either by borrowing or lending; the cited poem shows this usage. TABRISI (author): The verb دنت means borrowing while أدنت means lending; أمل and أملى are both used for dictating. TABRISI (author): بدين may reinforce the meaning of تداينتم; alternatively it distinguishes debt transactions from تداينتم understood as mutual requital. | mentions 6:38 TABRISI (author): One analysis takes تداينتم as mutual requital, while another takes it as dealing in debt; adding بدين resolves this lexical ambiguity. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Dānaytu bayna al-amrayn means bringing two matters close together; the hadith’s danū means eat what is nearest. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Dīn can mean dominion: to dāna a people is to subdue them, and they then submit. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Dāyana means transacting by extending a loan; adāna means borrowing on debt. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari distinguishes tadāyantum for dealing, selling, or lending from dayn for recompense; the latter is pronounced with kasra, as in 51:12, and a cited poem illustrates recompense. | mentions 51:12 RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj parses the accusative by supplying مداينة as the subject, while Abu ʿAli al-Farisi objects that a debt transaction cannot be immediate trade. RAZI-FULL (الأحمر): Al-Ahmar cites a line using dāna for borrowing and repayment to illustrate the verb’s debt-related meanings. RAZI-FULL (author): Although reciprocal form tadāyantum might suggest each party incurs a debt, al-Razi reads it broadly as transacting in a way that results in a debt. RAZI-FULL (ابن الأنباري): Ibn al-Anbari says bidayn specifies the financial sense of tadāyantum, since the verb can also mean reciprocal recompense. RAZI-FULL (صاحب الكشاف): The author of al-Kashshaf explains that bidayn supplies the antecedent for the pronoun in فاكتبوه and improves the sentence’s ordering. RAZI-FULL (author): The word bidayn may be emphatic, as in the Qur’anic phrases فسجد الملائكة كلهم أجمعون and ولا طائر يطير بجناحيه. | mentions 15:30, 6:38 RAZI-FULL (author): Bidayn can also generalize the rule to small or large transactions and to loans, salam, or deferred sales. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi’s own explanation is that adding bidayn limits the reciprocal form to transactions producing one debt, thereby excluding invalid debt-for-debt exchange. RAZI-FULL (author): The purpose of witnesses is to let the creditor establish the claim if the debtor later denies it; istashhidu means make someone testify, and shahidayn means two witnesses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Tadāyantum is a reciprocal verb from debt, applying whether one lends or borrows, as reciprocal sale can mean giving or taking. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Ila ajal can modify tadāyantum directly or be an adjective phrase for dayn. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The passage uses contrasting paronomasia in debt/indebtedness, writer/writing, and entrustment/trust. SAMIN-DURR (author): إلى أجل attaches to تداينتم; attaching it to an omitted adjective of دين is possible but weak because it fronts an interpreted adjective before an explicit one. SAMIN-DURR (author): تداين is reciprocal form of الدين, like تبايع from البيع; داينت means dealing in debt whether giving or taking, as in Ruʾbah's verse. SAMIN-DURR (author): دنت الرجل means selling to him on credit, while أدنته means borrowing from him; the two patterns differentiate the directions. SAMIN-DURR (author): The pronoun in فاكتبوه returns to دين; that noun is repeated to provide an antecedent, disambiguate reciprocal تداينوا, or indicate every amount of debt. BURHAN (author): A second explanation treats tadaayantum as a reciprocal verb derived from debt and says bi-dayn specifies that debt is the intended sense. BURHAN (فخر الدين): Fakhr al-Din says the wording indicates a prohibition on exchanging one debt for another, which the Prophet explained as deferred-for-deferred sale; the reciprocal verb suggests obligations on both sides, while the singular debt identifies one debt between them. BURHAN (author): Because tadaayantum can mean borrowing, sale, or reciprocal recompense, bi-dayn clarifies the intended debt sense; al-Hamasi's line illustrates the root's reciprocal sense. BIQAI-FULL (author): Tadayantum describes mutual dealings over debt; debt is a liability, whether due now or later, unlike present cash or goods. ALUSI-FULL (author): Tadāyantum means dealing with one another; adding bi-dayn makes explicit that the shared transaction is a debt, since the verb can also mean reciprocal recompense. Al-Alusi rejects reliance on context alone for legal clarity. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Some say dayn is mentioned to provide an explicit antecedent for the later pronoun; others say it improves the wording, but the objection that tadāyantum already supplies the sense is answered because it does not clearly identify the debt itself. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Adding bi-dayn may be emphatic, or it may provide the noun resumed by write it; al-Zamakhshari says it also makes clear the distinction between deferred and immediate debts. IBNASHUR-FULL (الطيبي): Al-Tibi, quoting al-Raʾid, notes that tadāyun could figuratively mean making a promise, as in Ruʾba's line about a debt owed and partly delayed, so bi-dayn removes that ambiguity. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): In Arabic, dayn is deferred consideration; specifying a fixed term prevents disputes and inserts the rule of deferred payment within the rule requiring documentation. ASAD-NOTES (author): The credit rule covers loans and commercial transactions, and tadayantum grammatically includes both the giver and receiver of credit."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q06", "question": "Why is بدين added?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q06/p1", "position": "Bi-dayn clarifies the debt sense and supplies the antecedent of 'write it'.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Bidayn can also generalize the rule to small or large transactions and to loans, salam, or deferred sales. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi’s own explanation is that adding bidayn limits the reciprocal form to transactions producing one debt, thereby excluding invalid debt-for-debt exchange. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Tadāyantum means dealing with one another on credit as giver or taker; mentioning debt excludes a possible sense of reciprocity, shows deferred and current debts, and explains writing. BURHAN (author): A second explanation treats tadaayantum as a reciprocal verb derived from debt and says bi-dayn specifies that debt is the intended sense. BIQAI-FULL (author): The added phrase by debt excludes a sale of debt for debt, since that transaction would involve two debts. IBNASHUR-FULL (الطيبي): Al-Tibi, quoting al-Raʾid, notes that tadāyun could figuratively mean making a promise, as in Ruʾba's line about a debt owed and partly delayed, so bi-dayn removes that ambiguity."}, {"id": "2:282/q06/p2", "position": "It supplies the pronoun's 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
