<<chunk 26, part 4 of 0..5>>
at recording a fixed-term debt and the scribe's duty to write are binding unless proof establishes recommendation; the trust exception applies when writing or a scribe is unavailable, so it does not abrogate the ordinary rule. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects abrogation by the trust clause: a conditional concession does not cancel a rule that can coexist with it, just as travel ablution and expiation alternatives do not cancel their ordinary rules. | mentions 2:283, 4:43, 5:6, 4:92, 58:3 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The sound view is that witnessing makes a transaction prudent while mutual trust leaves room; no abrogation follows, because documentation is recommended as a precaution for rights people may waive, and 2:283 instructs debtors to repay when trusted. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي والحكم وابن عيينة): A group says documentation was once obligatory and was abrogated by the permission to rely on mutual trust in the following verse; al-Razi later rejects abrogation without proof. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (الجمهور): The majority treat documentation as recommended protection against lost property and doubt; Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls this correct because a person may waive a financial claim, so there is no abrogation."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q12", "question": "Why document a deferred debt?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q12/p1", "position": "Writing protects rights against forgetfulness, denial, and dispute.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. TAB-FULL (author): Written documentation makes testimony more accurate because it preserves the parties' exact acknowledged words, keeps witnesses' accounts aligned, and makes judgment clearer; obeying God's command is itself more just than abandoning it. TAB-FULL (author): Writing every debt, large or small, makes the transaction more just, gives witnesses a sounder basis, and helps prevent doubt about the amount and due date. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda urges reliance on God's assurance in documenting rights: writing protects property, benefits the pious, and makes even a wicked debtor more likely to pay because witnesses exist. ZAJJAJ (author): Writing debt preserves people’s property; witnesses and proof discourage a creditor from being tempted to deny or erase the debt, so God commands recording and testimony. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Writing and witnessing debts prevents denial and forgetfulness; one who fails to witness has disobeyed. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Record small and large debts through their due dates because writing better preserves the due date and amount. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Documentation prevents doubt about the right, due date, and testimony; al-Suddi and Sufyan specify avoiding doubt in testimony, while Muqatil links the clause to what is recorded. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): The phrase also means that documentation is more likely to prevent forgetting. NAHHAS (author): Some say a later verse licensed leaving documentation; others say trust permits omission, while another view says writing deferred debt is obligatory to protect rights. | mentions 2:106 WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء وابن جريج وإبراهيم وابن جرير): A group, chosen by Ibn Jarīr, treat writing and witnessing deferred debts as obligatory to protect wealth and deter denial; Ibrāhīm says even a tiny handful of greens should be documented. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. JISHUMI (author): Writing down the debt prevents later forgetfulness or denial. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Writing is most equitable because God commanded it, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and most nearly prevents doubt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Travel is singled out because writing and witnesses may be unavailable; a pledge preserves property in their place, not because pledging is forbidden at home. The Prophet pledged his armor while not travelling. IBNATIYYA-FULL (جمهور العلماء): Most scholars treat writing as recommended protection of property and removal of doubt; it does not harm a pious debtor and protects the creditor against an unreliable one. TABRISI (author): Writing the debt or testimony is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and closer to preventing doubt; قسط means fairness and الأقسط means acting justly. TABRISI (author): Writing the debt protects against forgetting or denial and secures the rights of creditor, debtor, and witnesses for the reasons explained. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The command concerns a debt due at a specified term and requires writing and witnesses to protect property and people from injustice; documented proof restrains a debtor’s temptation to deny it. RAZI-FULL (author): Aqwam means more upright; writing supports accurate testimony through preservation and memory, serving worldly benefit, while the first benefit serves religion and is placed first to prioritize religion. RAZI-FULL (author): Writing also reduces doubt and protects both parties from uncertain recollection and accusations that can lead to backbiting or slander. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين): Most exegetes say immediate trade is exempt from writing but remains subject to witnessing, which is easier and avoids later memory failure. RAZI-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffal sees the verse’s unusually repeated instructions as deliberate emphasis: careful documentation preserves lawful wealth needed for charity and avoidance of forbidden gain. RAZI-FULL (author): Writing and witnesses protect both sides when payment is deferred: the creditor avoids premature or excessive demands, and the debtor avoids denial and can prepare payment. RAZI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي والحكم وابن عيينة): A group says documentation was once obligatory and was abrogated by the permission to rely on mutual trust in the following verse; al-Razi later rejects abrogation without proof. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (author): Although idha alone does not express universal scope, the stated rationale applies to every debt transaction: documentation prevents mistaken claims of increase or loss. QURTUBI-FULL (الجمهور): The majority treat documentation as recommended protection against lost property and doubt; Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls this correct because a person may waive a financial claim, so there is no abrogation. QURTUBI-FULL (author): فاكتبوه commands recording the debt and its term; some say it also implies witnesses, since writing without witnesses is not legal proof, and it prevents forgetting. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): He holds that documenting every debt, whether sale or loan, is obligatory to prevent forgetfulness or denial. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Writing is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and likelier to prevent doubt about debt kind, amount, date, and witnesses; aqsaṭ and aqwam have irregular morphological analyses. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The exception covers present trade managed hand to hand, whether exchanging debt or goods, where writing is less necessary to prevent dispute and forgetfulness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Writing protects against forgetfulness and denial; although its command appears obligatory, the majority treat it as recommended preservation that reduces doubt and supports acknowledgment. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The exception is disconnected because immediate sales are not deferred debts; writing may be omitted because it protects against uncertainty about amount, description, and term. Other views connect the exception to the debt or writing command. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Writing deferred transactions is guidance that better preserves the amount and due date and keeps the testimony accurate, as the verse's stated rationale explains. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Writing is ordered for documentation and preservation, not because religion itself requires writing: Qur'an and Sunna are made easy to memorize. Specific transactions should be written as guidance, not obligation, according to one view, reconciling the instruction with the report that the community neither writes nor calculates. BURSEVI (author): Writing the debt and its due date is safer and prevents disputes; the majority consider the command a recommendation. BURSEVI (author): Documenting it to the due date is fairest before God, strengthens testimony, and best prevents doubt about the debt, amount, term, or witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): The command to have a just scribe specifies how to write and who does it; keeping either contracting party from writing prevents suspicion, and the scribe should be learned in law as well as fair and trustworthy. ELMALILI (author): Detailed documentation has three benefits: it is most just before God, supports the establishment of testimony, and most nearly prevents doubt. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The law alerts right-holders against careless neglect and later regret, preserves trust between parties, eases a debtor’s resentment at documentation, and prevents disputes. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The command to witness is additional to writing: writing preserves the contract’s wording and conditions against forgetfulness; jurists call it remembrance of the right and also a contract. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (الحارث بن حلزة): Al-Ḥārith ibn Ḥilliza’s verse illustrates the written record as something preserved on parchment against later whims and injustice. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Writing is more just because it better preserves the right, supports giving testimony, and reduces doubt; these three reasons make evidence clear and free of suspicion. IBNASHUR-FUL
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
