<<chunk 26, part 2 of 0..5>>
 for the needy, and an immediate sale would defeat that purpose. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The specified term is known by days or months, not left to harvest or the pilgrims' arrival; writing is safer and most scholars recommend it. NASAFI-FULL (author): A specified term is a known period, such as harvest, threshing, or the pilgrims' return. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A specified term is not a restrictive condition because every valid debt must have a known term; harvest, threshing, or pilgrims' return are too indefinite. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The same account compares ʿUthmān’s action with ʿUmar enforcing triple divorce after its repeated use, restricting pilgrimage-season tamattuʿ to keep visits to the Kaʿba from being confined to pilgrimage months, and Abū Mūsā’s obedience in ceasing his fatwa. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): A deferred sale may not be tied to the harvest, delivery of the stipend, threshing floor, or pressing of juice; it must have a fixed term. ITQAN (أبو هريرة): A report in al-Mustadrak has the Prophet answer a question about kalālah by citing the summer verse; revelation during the Farewell Pilgrimage is classified as summer, including the start of al-Māʾidah, ‘Today I perfected,’ the debt verse, and al-Naṣr. BURSEVI (author): The stated due date should use days, months, years, or another precise measure; harvest, threshing, or a pilgrim’s arrival are too uncertain. ALUSI-FULL (author): A specified term is a known time expressed in days, months, or comparable units; a harvest date is too uncertain and would undermine the agreement. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (İbn Abbas): Ibn Abbas says the verse was revealed about salam, a sale paid for in advance with goods delivered later, for example at harvest. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The segment catalogs Qur’anic uses of the no-blame formula in legal allowances, including immediate trade, pilgrimage, travel prayer, food, entering uninhabited houses, and other cases. | mentions 2:198, 4:101, 5:93, 24:29, 24:60, 24:61, 33:5, 60:10"}, {"id": "2:282/q08/p3", "position": "Harvest and similar events can count as known terms", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (author): There is consensus that the term must be known; Malik alone also accepts harvest or fruit-picking as a sufficiently known deadline, discussed under the verse about lunar phases. | mentions 2:189 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Maliki scholars permit tying salam to harvest, fruit-picking, Nowruz, or Mihrajan because these mark known times."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q09", "question": "What does أجل مسمى mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q09/p1", "position": "Ajal musammā is a known appointed due date.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (العرب): In genitive forms such as ʿajlānik and mālin kathīr, speakers incline by analogy with bābik and with māshin and dāʿin. SIBAWAYH (author): In longer nouns from a wāw root, the final alif may incline toward yāʾ once the form has developed a yāʾ, the relevant pattern for musammā. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari takes write it to mean documenting the debt due at the appointed time, whether from a sale or loan, then introduces a dispute about whether writing is obligatory or recommended. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): An ajal is the time set for an interval to end; a person’s ajal is death, while a debt’s ajal is its due date, and the root conveys delay. JISHUMI (author): Al-dayn is an obligation established in the debtor's liability, and al-ajal is the appointed time, or the time's end. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The wording إلى أجل مسمى states the required known, fixed term; two poetic lines use دين for a deferred rather than immediate obligation. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن المنذر): He says إلى أجل مسمى proves salam with an unknown term is invalid, as also shown by Prophetic practice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Ila ajal can modify tadāyantum directly or be an adjective phrase for dayn. SAMIN-DURR (author): إلى أجل is emphatic because debt is necessarily deferred; مسمى's alif comes from yāʾ, itself from waw in the root. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ilā ajalihi is circumstantial: the record must specify the debt up to the agreed term. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): An ajl is a bounded period assigned to an activity not requiring immediate completion; ajl is a noun, taʾjīl its verbal noun, and the term also means delay, as at 2:234–235. | mentions 2:234, 2:235 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Musammā literally means named or distinguished; here it metaphorically means a determinate endpoint known to people, like the juristic phrase al-mahr al-musammā."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q10", "question": "How is إلى أجل attached grammatically?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q10/p1", "position": "The term phrase attaches to the mutual debt transaction.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Ila ajal can modify tadāyantum directly or be an adjective phrase for dayn. SAMIN-DURR (author): إلى أجل attaches to تداينتم; attaching it to an omitted adjective of دين is possible but weak because it fronts an interpreted adjective before an explicit one."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q11", "question": "Is writing a deferred debt obligatory?", "turns_on": "Whether the imperative remains binding, is advice, or was eased by trust or the harm clause.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q11/p1", "position": "Writing is obligatory and remains in force", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari takes write it to mean documenting the debt due at the appointed time, whether from a sale or loan, then introduces a dispute about whether writing is obligatory or recommended. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabiʿ says the writing requirement was initially obligatory. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says the command made writing obligatory on scribes. ZAJJAJ (author): The author argues that the next command not to tire of writing reinforces that giving testimony from the outset is obligatory. IBNABIHATIM (الربيع): The command to write was obligatory. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): Writing is obligatory for the scribe; al-Rabiʿ agrees, while ʿAta and al-Shaʿbi say the scribe should not refuse. NAHHAS (author): Some say a later verse licensed leaving documentation; others say trust permits omission, while another view says writing deferred debt is obligatory to protect rights. | mentions 2:106 THALABI (author): Jurists disagree whether writing is obligatory; Ibn Jurayj says a borrower should write and a seller obtain witnesses, the view chosen by al-Tabari and supported by a prophetic report that begins by naming three unanswered supplications. THALABI (السدي): Al-Suddi says writing is obligatory when the writer is free from other work. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan makes writing obligatory when refusing would harm the creditor because no other writer is available, but optional when another can do it. MAWARDI-FULL (الربيع وكعب): Writing the debt is obligatory. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء وابن جريج وإبراهيم وابن جرير): A group, chosen by Ibn Jarīr, treat writing and witnessing deferred debts as obligatory to protect wealth and deter denial; Ibrāhīm says even a tiny handful of greens should be documented. JISHUMI (مجاهد وعطاء والربيع): Mujāhid, ʿAṭāʾ, and al-Rabīʿ say writing is obligatory when the scribe is asked. JISHUMI (الربيع وكعب): Al-Rabīʿ and Kaʿb regard writing the debt as obligatory. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some say writing is obligatory, while the majority recommend it and say omission is harmless, comparing the command with the call to disperse after Friday prayer. | mentions 62:10 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says documentation was initially made obligatory by the command, then lightened by the trust exception in 2:283. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī treats documentation as obligatory and argues that commands remain obligatory until evidence shows otherwise. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ and others say “let a scribe write” makes writing obligatory on the scribe; al-Shaʿbī and ʿAṭāʾ also specify that this applies when he is the only available scribe, while al-Suddī says it applies when he is free. TABRISI (مجاهد وعطاء): Mujāhid and ʿAṭāʾ say writing becomes obligatory when the scribe is asked. TABRISI (الربيع وكعب): Al-Rabīʿ and Kaʿb regard writing as obligatory; the author cites the permission to rely on trust as evidence against obligation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عمر): A group including Ibn ʿUmar, Abu Musa, Mujahid, Ibn Sirin, and others regard writing and witnessing as obligatory. RAZI-FULL (عطاء وابن جريج والنخعي والطبري): ʿAtaʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿi, and al-Tabari hold that writing and witnessing deferred debts are obligatory; al-Nakhaʿi even requires witnessing a tiny vegetable purchase. RAZI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi regards writing as a communal obligation: one writer must act if no others are available, while one among several suffices. QURTUBI-FULL (الربيع): He says writing was initially obligatory under these words, then God eased the requirement with the clause permitting trusted transactions. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن): He makes writing obligatory only where refusal would harm the creditor because no substitute writer is available; otherwise the writer has latitude. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Writing protects against forgetfulness and denial; although its command appears obligatory, the majority treat it as recommended preservation that reduces doubt and supports acknowledgment. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says writing is obligatory when the scribe has time. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): For most exegetes, “no blame” means no harm in omitting writing because writing is not obligatory; those who require it interpret the phrase as “no sin.” IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Writing is ordered for documentation and preservation, not because religion itself requires writing: Qur'an and Sunna are made easy to memorize. Specific transactions should be written as guidance, not obligation, according to one view, reconciling the instruction with the report that the community neither writes nor calculates. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya says documentation is recommended, not obligatory, because a
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
