<<chunk 27, part 2 of 0..5>>
r): A just scribe writes without altering amount or term and must not refuse when asked; this was first obligatory for writer and witness, then abrogated by the prohibition on harming them. JISHUMI (author): Qisṭ means justice and derives from turning toward the truth; aqsaṭa describes acting justly. JISHUMI (author): The scribe records the debt or sale between the parties with fairness, neither adding nor subtracting nor harming either without their knowledge. JISHUMI (عطاء وطاووس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): The writer must not be harmed by being forbidden to write or made to add or subtract from what was dictated; the witness must not be made to refuse or testify to what he does not know. JISHUMI (author): The verse prescribes fair drafting of contract terms and documents and forbids harming either party. JISHUMI (author): The scribe must have enough expertise to distinguish fair documentation from unfair terms. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): A just scribe records the debt agreement for both creditor and debtor without adding, subtracting, or altering its term. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘With justice’ describes a trustworthy scribe who writes evenly and carefully, adding and omitting nothing; parties should choose a learned jurist who knows legal conditions. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وطاوس وابن زيد): They say “do not harm a scribe or witness” prohibits a writer from adding to or subtracting from what was dictated and a witness from altering testimony; Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also understand it to prohibit their refusal. TABRISI (author): The scribe must not refuse to write; كما علمه الله may mean writing justly as God taught, or that the scribe must not hoard the skill God gave him. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas, Mujahid, ʿIkrima, al-Suddi, al-Rabiʿ, al-Farra, and Muqatil say a scribe or witness must not be burdened with a summons while busy; al-Rabiʿ describes a requester insisting despite an available alternative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الحسن): Al-Hasan, Tawus, Qatada, and Ibn Zayd say the scribe must not alter what was dictated, nor the witness testify to something he was not asked to witness; Ibn Qutayba and al-Zajjaj prefer this reading. RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the reading that writers and witnesses must not harm the claimant, while the opposing reading points to the plural address and the ensuing plural verb. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وطاوس وابن زيد): Al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, Ṭāwūs, and Ibn Zayd say a scribe must write only what is dictated and a witness must neither add to nor subtract from testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The impartial writer stands between debtor and creditor because each might suspect the other of biased documentation; alternatively, the command reflects that some people can write and some cannot. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Lā yuḍārr has two readings: scribes and witnesses must not refuse, distort, or alter testimony, or others must not harm them by disrupting duties, demanding extra travel, or withholding their fees and expenses. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The writer must be fair and add or subtract nothing; the parties should choose a learned, religious writer so the document is reliable and lawful. NASAFI-FULL (author): The scribe must be trustworthy and precise, adding nothing and omitting nothing; the debtor's document should be legally valid. NASAFI-FULL (author): The scribe should understand legal conditions, so the parties should select a learned, upright jurist who writes only what Islamic law accepts. NASAFI-FULL (author): No scribe should refuse to write the document as God taught, altering or changing its form. NASAFI-FULL (author): The active reading forbids a scribe or witness to refuse, distort, add, or omit; the passive forbids burdening them, rushing them from duties, withholding the scribe's fee, or making a witness bear travel costs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī attaches bi-l-ʿadl to kātib: the scribe must be trustworthy, write evenly, and know legal conditions, so the parties should select a learned, pious writer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): An active reading forbids a writer altering the document or a witness concealing, changing, or withholding testimony; al-Zajjāj prefers this. Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also explain harm as refusing with excuses about being busy. SAMIN-DURR (الزجاج): On the active reading, the scribe and witness are forbidden to harm the beneficiary by altering or withholding documentation; al-Zajjaj prefers it because such conduct is clearly sinful. SAMIN-DURR (author): On the passive reading, no one may harm the scribe or witness; its context concerns those receiving the writing and testimony, and the consequence would otherwise address two people. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): A writer must record fairly and justly, without bias or adding to or reducing the agreed terms. BIQAI-FULL (author): The writer may be a child or slave, provided the writing is done fairly. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): A just scribe adds nothing beyond what is owed and subtracts nothing from the claimant's right. BURSEVI (author): The scribe should mediate between both parties and record what each says, in equal terms without favor, addition, or omission; they should choose a learned, religious jurist whose document is legally reliable. BURSEVI (author): If active, the prohibition bars a scribe from refusing or altering the document and a witness from withholding testimony; if passive, it bars others from harming them while occupied or withholding their fee. ALUSI-FULL (author): The command to have a just scribe specifies how to write and who does it; keeping either contracting party from writing prevents suspicion, and the scribe should be learned in law as well as fair and trustworthy. ALUSI-FULL (author): Imlāl means dictating to a scribe; the form alternates with imlāʾ through sound changes involving the doubled consonant and final hamza. ALUSI-FULL (author): Some refer 'let him fear' to the scribe, but al-Alusi rejects this: the debtor is particularly liable to reduce the amount, whereas the scribe might add or subtract, and fairness already governs the scribe. ALUSI-FULL (author): The expression 'from your men' is linked to the command or describes the witnesses partitivally; its address to believers is taken to imply Muslim, adult, male, and free witnesses, based on the customary sense of complete men. ALUSI-FULL (author): If active, the verse forbids witnesses and scribes to refuse, distort, add, or subtract; if passive, it forbids burdening them, withholding the fee, or requiring costly travel. ALUSI-FULL (author): Small and large describe the debt’s amount or its level of detail; alternatively they are predicates of an omitted kāna, with the smaller stated first for emphasis and progression. ELMALILI (author): The command not to harm a scribe or witness can mean they must not harm rights-holders by refusing a request or falsifying or altering the writing or testimony. ELMALILI (author): A neutral scribe should record both parties' rights equally; parties may keep private records, but those do not replace the impartial written contract. ELMALILI (author): A scribe must write as God taught, following proper documentary practice, justice, or gratitude for the gift of literacy; writing is a collective duty that becomes an individual duty when assigned. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The imperative to have a writer between the parties addresses the contracting parties, since most were unable to write; its surface direction to the writer is rhetorical emphasis on their arranging documentation. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): On the first reading, as God taught him means writing in exact correspondence with divine instruction, not approximately; kāf is an adverbial cognate or describes an omitted verbal noun, and mā is relative. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): God’s instruction is truth rooted in human nature: a scribe must record honestly without injustice or evasion, since people depart from truth through desire and alteration."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q17", "question": "When must a scribe accept a request?", "turns_on": "Whether the scribe's duty is individual, communal, conditional on availability, or abrogated.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q17/p1", "position": "A capable scribe must accept when asked", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (عطاء ومجاهد): Ata and Mujahid say the scribe is obliged to write, while the witness clause concerns someone who has already witnessed the matter. ABDURRAZZAQ (عطاء): Ata says the scribe and witness must deliver what is entrusted to them. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): The writer must not be made to record what was not dictated, nor the witness to testify without being summoned; another view says they may refuse a summons. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ says those summoned are people who already testified; an initial invitation may be declined because witnesses are plentiful, unlike the scribe's binding duty to write. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk includes witnesses who were formally engaged and scribes who wrote a record: when called to adjudicate a right, they must answer and report what they were entrusted with. TAB-FULL (ابن طاوس): Ibn Ṭāwūs says the writer must not record anything the person dictating did not say, nor may the witness attest to anything he was not asked to witness. TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says a scribe must not add or distort, and a witness must not conceal testimony or attest except to truth. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the scribe and witness must preserve every right accurately, adding nothing false and omitting no right. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ offers another interpretation: the writer and witness must not be harmed by having to withhold the knowledge or testimony they possess. TAB-FULL (عطاء ومجاهد): ʿAṭāʾ and Mujāhid say the writer must write when asked, while a witness must perform testimony already entrusted to him. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says one must not keep a busy writer or witness from his own need when another is ava
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
