<<chunk 27, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q13", "question": "What exactly must the written record contain?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q13/p1", "position": "The record specifies the obligation and its due date.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): A deferred debt’s amount and due date should be written; a fair scribe writes between buyer and seller without increasing the debtor’s amount or reducing the creditor’s right; scribes were few in Muhammad’s time. MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. TAB-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a small or large debt until its term; a written record keeps track of both the due date and amount. TAB-FULL (author): “That” means recording the debt through its due date; أَقْسَط means more just and comes from the verb for judging equitably, unlike قَسَط, which means to act unjustly. | mentions 72:15 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari takes write it to mean documenting the debt due at the appointed time, whether from a sale or loan, then introduces a dispute about whether writing is obligatory or recommended. TAB-FULL (ابن جريج): A borrower should write the debt, while a seller should obtain witnesses. TAB-FULL (author): The command means to write down any debt due at a fixed term, whether it arose from a sale or a loan. TAB-FULL (author): The refusal prohibition addresses a scribe asked to write a debt contract; God granted him writing knowledge that many people lack. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Record small and large debts through their due dates because writing better preserves the due date and amount. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Documentation prevents doubt about the right, due date, and testimony; al-Suddi and Sufyan specify avoiding doubt in testimony, while Muqatil links the clause to what is recorded. THALABI (author): A specified term is a known time; write the sale, loan, or other debt to prevent denial, forgetting, or dispute. THALABI (author): The writer records the debt agreement for seller, buyer, creditor, and debtor, accurately and impartially without changing amount, due date, or either party's rights. THALABI (author): A written record is more just, steadier for testimony, and less likely to leave doubt about the amount or term; the author compares this with another verse about giving testimony properly. | mentions 5:108 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The fair scribe records the debt with equity, granting neither party an advantage, altering neither the amount nor due date, and writing nothing that secretly defeats either party’s right. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): A writer must not refuse to document the debt as God taught him; abā means to refuse, and the source also records its use for refusing food. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Saʾāma means weariness or annoyance; the infinitive clause is accusative as the object of that weariness, and the pronouns in write it and its due date refer to the debt. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The command not to tire of writing is best addressed to creditors: document the rights they lend, small or large, with due date and term; the passage begins by addressing asset and debt holders, while trivial amounts are not normally recorded. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): A current sale that the parties transact hand to hand can omit documentation because the risks of deferred payment and term are absent. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): A just scribe writes without altering amount or term and must not refuse when asked; this was first obligatory for writer and witness, then abrogated by the prohibition on harming them. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses must not refuse when summoned to bear or give testimony; parties should not let irritation keep them from recording a small or large debt through its due date. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. JISHUMI (author): Do not tire of documenting the debt, whether small or large, and continue through its due date; another view refers to the witness’s term. JISHUMI (author): The scribe must have enough expertise to distinguish fair documentation from unfair terms. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Write the debt whether it arises from a sale, salam, or loan. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Mentioning debt supplies the antecedent for ‘write it,’ improves the wording, and distinguishes deferred from immediate debt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘Write it’ can refer to the debt or right; small or large describes the debt, or the document’s concise or full length without omission. TABRISI (author): Do not weary of recording a debt, small or large, until its term; this is fairer, steadier testimony, and less likely to leave doubts about amount or term. TABRISI (author): The command may address witnesses and mean not to tire of recording testimony; the stronger referent of its term is the debt's due date, not the witness's allowable period. TABRISI (الحسن وقتادة وعطاء وابن زيد): With kasra on the first rāʾ, the prohibition addresses the writer and witness: do not change dictated terms, testify to matters not requested, or refuse to testify. TABRISI (author): A just scribe records the debt or sale accurately, without changing its terms, amount, or anything that harms either party without consent. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Do not grow weary of recording small or large debts customarily deferred, through their due date; the document is more just, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and more nearly removes doubt. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The command to write calls for recording every detail that identifies the debt, preventing disputes and enabling a judge to decide if the parties later disagree. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The impartial writer stands between debtor and creditor because each might suspect the other of biased documentation; alternatively, the command reflects that some people can write and some cannot. QURTUBI-FULL (بعض علمائنا): Some Maliki scholars infer that loans may be deferred because the verse does not distinguish loans from other debt contracts; the Shafiʿis reply that it only orders documentation of an already deferred debt and that term rules come from other evidence. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Do not tire of recording any debt, small or large and brief or detailed, until its agreed due date; that refers to writing. NASAFI-FULL (author): The pronoun in أن تكتبوه may refer to the debt or the document; small or large can describe the debt's value, supporting salam in textiles, or describe a concise or detailed record. NASAFI-FULL (author): Write the debt through its agreed due date; ذلك refers to the act of writing as a verbal noun. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Recording every debt and due date protects property and prevents disputes; “small” comes first to stress that minor debts matter, and the due date is the parties' agreed term. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “write it” refers to the earlier debt or nearby right, equivalent in sense; those with many debts might tire of documentation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī suggests the pronoun means the document, which may be concise or detailed without being deficient; Abū Ḥayyān calls this far-fetched. SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘Small or large’ is circumstantial: either the debt is small or large, or the written record is brief or detailed. SAMIN-DURR (author): The pronoun in ‘write it’ may refer to the debt or the right; the latter is nearer, though it also means the debt. SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): The Shaykh rejects attachment to ‘write’: writing ends quickly and does not continue until the debt is due. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): A writer must record fairly and justly, without bias or adding to or reducing the agreed terms. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن جريج): He says a borrower should write down a debt and a buyer should have witnesses. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a debt, large or small, through its due date; writing deferred claims is more just before God, strengthens testimony by helping witnesses remember, and reduces doubt in disputes. BIQAI-FULL (author): People must not tire of documenting either small or large debts through their due date; the separate warning magnifies a duty people might neglect. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Write every debt, small or large, through its due date because writing better records the term and money, is fairer, strengthens testimony, and reduces doubt; spot trade may be left unwritten. BURSEVI (author): The scribe should mediate between both parties and record what each says, in equal terms without favor, addition, or omission; they should choose a learned, religious jurist whose document is legally reliable. BURSEVI (author): A scribe should not refuse to write the debt in the manner God taught for documenting agreements; the command reinforces the preceding prohibition. BURSEVI (author): Do not tire of documenting a debt, large or small, whether summarized or detailed, through its agreed due date. BURSEVI (author): Documenting it to the due date is fairest before God, strengthens testimony, and best prevents doubt about the debt, amount, term, or witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): The writer must not refuse to document the debt; 'as God taught him' means because God taught and favored him with documentary skill, like the command to do good as God did good to you. ELMALILI (author): Every debt, large or small, should be documented in detail through its due date, including all particulars and qualities, rather than dismissed as too minor to write. ELMALILI (author): A complete record secures confidence about the debt’s kind, amount,
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
