<<chunk 27, part 4 of 0..5>>
ip. ITQAN (بهاء الدين): Baha al-Din disputes restriction by لا: saying Zayd is a poet, not a writer denies one quality only, whereas restriction must deny every quality besides the one affirmed. ITQAN (author): The verse can mean that the scribe and witness must not wrong the claimant, or that the claimant must not harm them by imposing undue work or coercing them. BURSEVI (author): A scribe should not refuse to write the debt in the manner God taught for documenting agreements; the command reinforces the preceding prohibition. ALUSI-FULL (الطيبي): Al-Ṭībī sees a stated meaning plus an embedded implication: the writer must be legally knowledgeable to balance consequential matters; some infer that rulers should bar unqualified people from drafting legal documents. ALUSI-FULL (author): The writer must not refuse to document the debt; 'as God taught him' means because God taught and favored him with documentary skill, like the command to do good as God did good to you. ALUSI-FULL (author): If the second command repeats the earlier writing order, it emphasizes it because forbidding refusal does not explicitly command its opposite; some infer a communal obligation, but al-Alusi says this reading would impose hardship on the believers. ALUSI-FULL (الشعبي والجبائي والرماني): Al-Shaʿbī, al-Jubbāʾī, and al-Rummānī infer from 'let him write' and 'let no scribe refuse' that writing is a communal obligation; al-Ḥasan's position inclines that way. ELMALILI (author): While dictating, the debtor must fear God rather than the scribe and must not reduce any part of the creditor’s right. ELMALILI (author): The command not to harm a scribe or witness can mean they must not harm rights-holders by refusing a request or falsifying or altering the writing or testimony. ELMALILI (author): Alternatively, on the passive reading, scribes and witnesses themselves must not be harmed by excessive demands, interruption of important work, or denial of a scribe’s fee. ELMALILI (author): Appointing legal document scribes is among the government's duties, and such scribes must write when asked. ELMALILI (author): A scribe must write as God taught, following proper documentary practice, justice, or gratitude for the gift of literacy; writing is a collective duty that becomes an individual duty when assigned. IBNASHUR-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan makes the duty individual only when there is one scribe locally; if there are others, it is communal, and all are blameworthy if they collude in refusing. IBNASHUR-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says a scribe is obliged to respond only when he is free. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): God’s instruction is truth rooted in human nature: a scribe must record honestly without injustice or evasion, since people depart from truth through desire and alteration. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حنيفة): The author applies the earlier disagreement about scribes: accepting the request to bear witness becomes individual when designated, and giving testimony is individually obligatory if it causes no bodily or financial harm; Abū Ḥanīfa makes performance communal unless uniquely required, subject to court integrity, proximity, admissibility, and a claimant’s request. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The address primarily concerns contracting parties and by implication includes the scribe, who must write when they request it. ASAD-NOTES (author): A scribe or witness must not be harmed by being held responsible for the contract’s consequences or either party’s failure to perform. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Jurists differ on whether an approached scribe must write: some say it is individually obligatory, others say a collective duty when time allows; Jassas says writing itself is not obligatory, but one should teach it or find another writer to prevent rights being lost. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Whether a scribe may charge depends on whether writing is obligatory, since religious duties cannot be paid work but optional acts may be; the author deems abstention impermissible when capable writers are available, especially if no substitute exists and rights may be lost. STUDYQURAN (Q, R): A scribe’s duty to write contracts is communal: society must provide someone, but each individual need not do it."}, {"id": "2:282/q17/p2", "position": "A scribe approached to write should accept the task.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (طاوس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): One reading prohibits harming a scribe or witness through falsifying or altering the record, bearing false testimony, or refusing to testify; the active form has the writer and witness as agents. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The ban on harming a scribe or witness forbids altering records, false testimony, and refusing to testify; doing so is sinful. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The indefinite ‘a scribe’ generalizes the prohibition: no scribe should refuse to write. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وطاوس وابن زيد): They say “do not harm a scribe or witness” prohibits a writer from adding to or subtracting from what was dictated and a witness from altering testimony; Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also understand it to prohibit their refusal. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد والضحاك والسدي وطاوس): They say a claimant harms a scribe or witness by demanding work when that person is busy or excused, then shaming him for refusing; the word's reciprocal sense encompasses these readings and the preceding ones. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If harm means falsification by a writer or witness, fisq is the legal commission of grave sins and invalidating rights; if it means mistreatment or refusal, fisq means departing from what is right, though disobeying God's command approaches the legal sense too. TABRISI (الحسن وقتادة وعطاء وابن زيد): With kasra on the first rāʾ, the prohibition addresses the writer and witness: do not change dictated terms, testify to matters not requested, or refuse to testify. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عطاء): A third view from ʿAta and others says the harm is the scribe refusing to write or the witness refusing to testify. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد وعطاء): Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ interpret the prohibition as forbidding a scribe or witness from refusing when asked to serve. NASAFI-FULL (author): No scribe should refuse to write the document as God taught, altering or changing its form. NASAFI-FULL (author): The active reading forbids a scribe or witness to refuse, distort, add, or omit; the passive forbids burdening them, rushing them from duties, withholding the scribe's fee, or making a witness bear travel costs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The prohibition lā yaʾba kātib an yaktub forbids a scribe from refusing to write. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): An active reading forbids a writer altering the document or a witness concealing, changing, or withholding testimony; al-Zajjāj prefers this. Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also explain harm as refusing with excuses about being busy. BURSEVI (author): If active, the prohibition bars a scribe from refusing or altering the document and a witness from withholding testimony; if passive, it bars others from harming them while occupied or withholding their fee. ALUSI-FULL (author): The expression 'from your men' is linked to the command or describes the witnesses partitivally; its address to believers is taken to imply Muslim, adult, male, and free witnesses, based on the customary sense of complete men. ALUSI-FULL (author): If active, the verse forbids witnesses and scribes to refuse, distort, add, or subtract; if passive, it forbids burdening them, withholding the fee, or requiring costly travel. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The ban on a scribe refusing a request is a separate rule directed to the scribe, not a repetition of the command directed to the contracting parties. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The request’s grammatical complement is the phrase between you, not the writer; the writer’s own commands are the prohibition on refusing and the following imperative to write. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The verse forbids writers and witnesses from harming others by suppressing, refusing, or distorting testimony, and forbids others from coercing them into the same harms."}, {"id": "2:282/q17/p3", "position": "The scribe's duty was abrogated", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that recording a fixed-term debt and the scribe's duty to write are binding unless proof establishes recommendation; the trust exception applies when writing or a scribe is unavailable, so it does not abrogate the ordinary rule. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): A just scribe writes without altering amount or term and must not refuse when asked; this was first obligatory for writer and witness, then abrogated by the prohibition on harming them. JISHUMI (author): Some say the command that a scribe not refuse was abrogated by the instruction not to harm a scribe or witness; the adopted practice is the first view, communal obligation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabīʿ and al-Ḍaḥḥāk, as transmitted by al-Mahdawī, say the prohibition on a scribe refusing was abrogated by the command not to cause harm in 2:282. | mentions 2:282 RAZI-FULL (author): Another view says the writer’s duty was obligatory but later abrogated by the prohibition on harming writers and witnesses. | mentions 2:282 QURTUBI-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): They say the order to write was abrogated by the prohibition against harming a writer or witness; al-Qurṭubī calls this remote because a universal obligation was never established and paid document-writing is permitted. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabīʿ and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say the ban on a scribe refusing was abrogated by the later ban on harming a scribe or witness. ALUSI-FULL (مجاهد والضحاك): Mujāhid and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say the individual scribe must write when asked; another position recommends writing, and a report from al-Ḍaḥḥāk says its original obligation was later abrogated. IBNASHUR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk, with a report from ʿAṭāʾ, regards the scribe’s duty as abrogated by the ban on harming
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
