<<chunk 27, part 1 of 0..5>>
 term, witnesses, testimony, and the parties’ moral, legal, and social relations. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The next verse gives pledge as the alternative when a writer cannot be found, without making unwritten testimony an intermediate option; thus a writer may also be one of the witnesses. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Adding bi-dayn may be emphatic, or it may provide the noun resumed by write it; al-Zamakhshari says it also makes clear the distinction between deferred and immediate debts. ASAD-NOTES (author): Writing down the contract means recording all rights and obligations that arise from it. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The command for a scribe to write has been read as having literate parties write and exchange documents, while an able writer records the debt for illiterate parties; the verse supports written documents as evidence in Islamic law. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli read scriptural stories as representations that convey meanings, not historical records; detailed literal claims can clash with modern sensibilities, as in prohibitions of images despite their use in religious teaching. STUDYQURAN (Q): Writing records the agreement’s terms for memory; it does not replace a living witness, since testimony was primarily oral and secondarily written."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q14", "question": "Who arranges or writes the contract?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q14/p1", "position": "A scribe records the agreement between the contracting parties.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): A deferred debt’s amount and due date should be written; a fair scribe writes between buyer and seller without increasing the debtor’s amount or reducing the creditor’s right; scribes were few in Muhammad’s time. TAB-FULL (author): The scribe is to record the debt between creditor and debtor fairly, without diminishing the creditor's due or falsely imposing a debt on the debtor. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The impartial writer stands between debtor and creditor because each might suspect the other of biased documentation; alternatively, the command reflects that some people can write and some cannot. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Between you means between creditor and debtor, seller and buyer, or lender and borrower; both should be present so neither side is suspected of dictating a biased record. BURSEVI (author): ‘From your men’ means free adult Muslims of your community; in transactions between unbelievers or where the debtor is an unbeliever, unbelievers may be witnesses according to the author’s school. BURSEVI (author): Immediate exchange with both parties present may be left unwritten because hand-to-hand trade is less prone to dispute and forgetting. ELMALILI (author): He prefers understanding the command to address both parties, scribes, and witnesses, urging them to keep their own records and, where possible, write down testimony they have undertaken. ELMALILI (author): A neutral scribe should record both parties' rights equally; parties may keep private records, but those do not replace the impartial written contract. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The law alerts right-holders against careless neglect and later regret, preserves trust between parties, eases a debtor’s resentment at documentation, and prevents disputes. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Writing may be done by both contracting parties, or by one who gives the document to the other, when both can write; one party’s illiteracy undermines trust in the other’s handwriting. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The imperative to have a writer between the parties addresses the contracting parties, since most were unable to write; its surface direction to the writer is rhetorical emphasis on their arranging documentation. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Exegetes restrict the initial command to writing by a third-party scribe because that was usual and the next clause explains how to do it; the parties’ own writing is understood implicitly. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The address primarily concerns contracting parties and by implication includes the scribe, who must write when they request it. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The command for a scribe to write has been read as having literate parties write and exchange documents, while an able writer records the debt for illiterate parties; the verse supports written documents as evidence in Islamic law."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q15", "question": "How does بالعدل attach?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q15/p1", "position": "Bi-l-ʿadl qualifies the act of writing", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): If the phrase attaches to ‘write,’ the scribe must use that taught form; if it attaches to ‘let him write,’ refusal is prohibited generally before writing is ordered with qualifications. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): “With justice” modifies the act of writing, not the noun “scribe”; a child, slave, or disfavored person can draft a sound document, though officials should use upright, trusted, knowledgeable document writers. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The phrase بالعدل attaches to the act of writing rather than the writer, since a child, slave, or careful layperson could write accurately; appointed notaries must still be upright, knowledgeable, and trusted, as Malik says. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī attaches bi-l-ʿadl to kātib: the scribe must be trustworthy, write evenly, and know legal conditions, so the parties should select a learned, pious writer. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya attaches the preposition to yaktub rather than kātib: even a child or enslaved person can write a sound deed if legally informed, though officials must choose just, trusted scribes. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The kaaf most naturally modifies an yaktub; ending the clause there and attaching it to fa-lyaktub is awkward because of the fa and the reversed order. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari attaches بالعدل to كاتب as its adjective, meaning a trustworthy writer. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): In that alternative, kāf functions as an adverbial cognate or adjective of an understood object, mā is a verbal noun, and the phrase may attach to an yaktub. IBNASHUR-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī allows the phrase to attach instead to fal-yaktub; the author calls this a possible interpretive construction."}, {"id": "2:282/q15/p2", "position": "Bi-l-ʿadl qualifies the just scribe", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): أول, كل, and خير can be indefinite when attached to an indefinite and can describe one; the following noun behaves as an indefinite adjective. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): A third grammatical view treats bāʾ as extra, yielding the sense let the just scribe write."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q16", "question": "What makes a scribe's writing just?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q16/p1", "position": "Justice requires an accurate, impartial record without addition or omission.", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): Lā yabkhas means not to diminish; the proverb describes her as foolish but unjust. TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says a scribe must not add or distort, and a witness must not conceal testimony or attest except to truth. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the scribe and witness must preserve every right accurately, adding nothing false and omitting no right. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the scribe harms people by changing what was dictated, while a witness harms them by altering testimony and thereby voiding their rights. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers that the prohibition addresses the rights-holder summoning a busy scribe or witness and insisting they comply when occupied; the surrounding commands address those arranging debts, and the plural warning “if you do” confirms that addressee. TAB-FULL (author): If the scribe and witness themselves were the addressees, the verse would say “if the two do it, it is wrongdoing for them”; instead it uses a plural warning to the parties arranging the transaction. TAB-FULL (author): The scribe is to record the debt between creditor and debtor fairly, without diminishing the creditor's due or falsely imposing a debt on the debtor. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says a God-fearing scribe omits no right and adds nothing false. IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): The scribe is commanded to write fairly between the parties. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Fairness requires that the scribe neither add to what is claimed nor reduce the claimant’s due. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): The debtor, witness, and scribe must fear God and neither conceal any right nor add falsehood to the record or testimony. IBNABIHATIM (السدى): The prescribed documentation is more just before God; Saʿid ibn Jubayr and Sufyan agree. THALABI (author): The writer records the debt agreement for seller, buyer, creditor, and debtor, accurately and impartially without changing amount, due date, or either party's rights. THALABI (طاوس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): On the active reading, a writer must not alter the dictated record and a witness must not invent testimony or refuse to establish what he saw. THALABI (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas reports that people sometimes pressured busy writers and witnesses by invoking the command, even when alternatives existed, so the verse prohibited harming them. MAWARDI-FULL (author): A just scribe must neither add a term to harm the debtor nor omit one to harm the creditor. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The fair scribe records the debt with equity, granting neither party an advantage, altering neither the amount nor due date, and writing nothing that secretly defeats either party’s right. WAHIDI-BASIT (طاوس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): One reading prohibits harming a scribe or witness through falsifying or altering the record, bearing false testimony, or refusing to testify; the active form has the writer and witness as agents. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The ban on harming a scribe or witness forbids altering records, false testimony, and refusing to testify; doing so is sinful. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (autho
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
