<<chunk 27, part 5 of 0..5>>
 a scribe or witness; the author objects that writing is not ordinarily harm except in rare cases such as great distance. | mentions 2:282"}, {"id": "2:282/q17/p4", "position": "The duty applies when the scribe is free", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): If a scribe has an urgent need and another is available, he may go and seek the other scribe, since scribes were few then. MAWARDI-FULL (الشعبي): Writing is incumbent on a scribe when he is free to do it. DURR-FULL (الربيع): When people pressed a busy scribe to write despite other available scribes, God revealed the prohibition against harming a scribe or witness."}, {"id": "2:282/q17/p5", "position": "The scribe may decline or the duty is advisory", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): One reading treats the ban on a writer’s refusal as guidance: writing for another Muslim is gratitude for God’s gift of literacy and legal knowledge. | mentions 28:77"}, {"id": "2:282/q17/p6", "position": "The duty applies only when no other scribe is available", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (author): Scholars agree valid salam specifies described, commonly available food, measure, term, payment in known currency before the parties separate, and delivery place; he knows no scholar who invalidates such a contract."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q18", "question": "What does كما علمه الله require and attach to?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q18/p1", "position": "Write according to God's legal instruction", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): Writing as God taught means writing as He commanded. THALABI (author): A writer must not refuse to write as God taught; this command mattered because trained writers were few in the Prophet's time. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): A writer must not refuse to document the debt as God taught him; abā means to refuse, and the source also records its use for refusing food. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): As God taught him may attach to write, meaning write as God commanded, or begin a new clause, meaning write as God favored him with literacy; al-Zajjāj gives both parses. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): As God taught him means according to the law God ordained and commanded. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘As God taught him’ means to write documents without altering them. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘As God taught him’ may attach to ‘write’ in the prohibition or to the later command, producing different scopes. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): As Allah taught him can attach to “write” as the manner of writing, to “not refuse” as a reason to repay God's gift, or begin a new sentence that attaches to “let him write.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj instead understands “as God taught him” to mean writing according to God’s command and truth. RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj gives two grammatical attachments for كما علمه الله: it can complete the preceding ban on refusal or introduce the following command to write. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The كاف in كما علمه الله may attach to the command that he write as taught, to the meaning of not refusing because God taught him, or—if the clause ends at أن يكتب—to فليكتب in a new sentence. NASAFI-FULL (author): No scribe should refuse to write the document as God taught, altering or changing its form. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): On the apparent reading, as God taught him means to write documentation as taught, without alteration; it urges the scribe to use his full knowledge of its conditions. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): If كما علمه الله attaches to أن يكتب, refusal of the specified writing is forbidden and that writing is commanded; if to فليكتب, refusal in general is forbidden, then qualified writing commanded. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): 'As God taught him' means as God commanded him. ALUSI-FULL (author): The mā in 'as God taught him' may be a verbal noun, particle of emphasis, relative pronoun, or adjective; pronoun reference changes accordingly, and some supply 'document writing' as the second object of 'taught.' ALUSI-FULL (author): The writer must not refuse to document the debt; 'as God taught him' means because God taught and favored him with documentary skill, like the command to do good as God did good to you. ELMALILI (author): A scribe must write as God taught, following proper documentary practice, justice, or gratitude for the gift of literacy; writing is a collective duty that becomes an individual duty when assigned."}, {"id": "2:282/q18/p2", "position": "As God taught him requires truthful writing according to God's instruction.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): A scribe should not refuse to write as God taught him. TABRISI (author): The scribe must not refuse to write; كما علمه الله may mean writing justly as God taught, or that the scribe must not hoard the skill God gave him. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿid ibn Jubayr says a scribe must not refuse to write as God taught him the skill of writing; al-Shaʿbi calls writing a communal duty like jihad. SAMIN-DURR (author): أن يكتب is the direct object of لا يأب. كما علمه الله may modify that writing or attach to the later فليكتب; the Sheikh finds the latter strained by word order and فاء. SAMIN-DURR (author): Even if كما attaches to فليكتب, its كاف can still be causal: he should write because God taught him. ITQAN (author): The pause after ولا يأب كاتب أن يكتب and the pause after كما علمه الله are likewise mutually exclusive. ALUSI-FULL (author): The phrase 'as God taught him' may modify the act of writing as an adverbial or circumstantial phrase, or attach to 'let him write'; the fāʾ can still connect because it functions semantically as a relative clause. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): On the first reading, as God taught him means writing in exact correspondence with divine instruction, not approximately; kāf is an adverbial cognate or describes an omitted verbal noun, and mā is relative. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas tells Nafi ibn al-Azraq that his answers are not conjecture but knowledge God taught him."}, {"id": "2:282/q18/p3", "position": "Repay God's gift of literacy by helping others", "reasons": "WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): “As God taught him” recognizes God’s favor of literacy; the debtor dictates because he is liable and must acknowledge the debt aloud without reducing it. KASHSHAF-FULL (وقيل): Alternatively, as in 28:77, the writer should benefit others through the skill God taught him. | mentions 28:77 RAZI-FULL (author): One reading treats the ban on a writer’s refusal as guidance: writing for another Muslim is gratitude for God’s gift of literacy and legal knowledge. | mentions 28:77 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Alternatively, kāf conveys reciprocal recompense: the literate person repays God’s gift of literacy by using it to preserve others’ rights and avoiding deceit or omission. | mentions 28:77, 2:198"}]}

<<end of chunk>>
