<<chunk 28, part 2 of 0..5>>
 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The person who owes the debt is the debtor, and must dictate it aloud so his obligation is known. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Al-ḥaqq here is the established due owed to the creditor."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q23", "question": "Who must fear God and not diminish the right?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q23/p1", "position": "The debtor is admonished to fear God and not reduce the right", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The command to fear God may address the debtor or scribe; neither may reduce any part of the debt or dictated statement. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the debt and must fear God, withholding none of it; if the debtor is wasteful and legally restricted, young, insane, or unable to dictate through speech difficulty or ignorance, the guardian dictates fairly. ELMALILI (author): While dictating, the debtor must fear God rather than the scribe and must not reduce any part of the creditor’s right. IBNASHUR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr takes both pronouns about fearing God and not reducing the amount to refer to the debtor, who must acknowledge the whole debt rather than shortchange the creditor. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author rejects the debtor as antecedent: the creditor is present and could object to omission, so the two pronouns more plausibly refer to the scribe, who might overlook dictated details."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q24", "question": "What does بخس mean here?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q24/p1", "position": "Bakhsa means diminishing or shortchanging a right.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The debtor must dictate the record, fear God, and omit none of what is owed; the warning against shortchanging also appears in 7:85. | mentions 7:85 SIBAWAYH (author): Marmawī is analogized to bakhtī because its ending has the same sequence of yāʾs and kasra; maghzawī keeps its form when no cluster arises. SIBAWAYH (رؤبة): Ruʾbah's ya dāra ʿAfrāʾ wa-dāra al-bakhdani is poetic evidence that a coordinated phrase remains carried by ya. MAJAZ (author): Lā yabkhas means not to diminish; the proverb describes her as foolish but unjust. TAB-FULL (author): The scribe is to record the debt between creditor and debtor fairly, without diminishing the creditor's due or falsely imposing a debt on the debtor. TAB-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate the debt to the scribe and fear God by not diminishing the creditor's right; cheating the creditor will be answered for on the Day of Judgment. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd explains that the debtor must not reduce any part of the other man's right while dictating. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Do not reduce any part of the claimant’s due. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Not diminishing the debt means neither wronging the debtor nor reducing what he owes; Qatada and al-Rabiʿ agree. THALABI (author): The debtor must fear God and not reduce any part of what he owes. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The debtor must not reduce any part of the debt. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Bakhs means diminution; the debtor must acknowledge the amount owed without reducing any part of it. JISHUMI (author): Bakhṣ means unjustly diminishing something, as in depriving someone of his due. | mentions 12:20 JISHUMI (author): The debtor must avoid disobeying God’s command and must not reduce any part of the debt. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The one dictating must fear God and not reduce any part of the debt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Bakhsa means a reduction from a debt or right. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The debtor must be God-conscious while dictating and must not diminish any part of the right; baks is reduction through deception or evasion. TABRISI (author): بخس is unjust diminution; safīh means ignorant or light-minded, named for the lightness of reason. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿid ibn Jubayr says the person owing the debt must dictate what he owes the claimant to the scribe and must not reduce any part of it. RAZI-FULL (author): A just record must neither inflate nor reduce the debt and must protect either party’s claim when needed. RAZI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate without diminishing any amount owed; if the debtor is not competent to make a valid acknowledgment, the guardian’s acknowledgment counts. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates because the testimony follows his admission; he must fear God and not diminish the debt, since بَخْس means reduction, as also in 2:228. | mentions 2:228 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The command to fear God may address the debtor or scribe; neither may reduce any part of the debt or dictated statement. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Bakhs means reduction or shortchanging; it can also mean an eye injury, and metaphorically applies to depriving someone of a right or cheating in sale. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مجاهد والسدي): Mujāhid and al-Suddī also describe the weak person as a fool; others say a minor or one with diminished faculties. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The debtor must not diminish any amount through deception or resistance; the person ordered to dictate is assumed to control himself. SAMIN-DURR (author): منه attaches to يبخس, with من marking origin and the pronoun referring to the debt; alternatively it is an omitted adjective of an indefinite, fronted as a circumstantial. SAMIN-DURR (author): شيئا may be a direct object or cognate accusative; بخس means decrease, originally of a damaged eye, metaphorically applied to a right, with بخص as a variant. BIQAI-FULL (author): A writer should not refuse this recommended service; gratitude to God requires writing as He taught, without diminishing the record. BIQAI-FULL (author): The debtor must fear God and avoid any shortfall; bakhs means a particularly severe reduction that wrongs the recipient. BIQAI-FULL (ابن السيد): Ibn al-Sayyid reports that qasata can mean either injustice or justice; here aqsatu means more equitable, preserving balance without shortchanging. ELMALILI (author): He says modesty and reserve predominate in women and should do so, and that even a small engagement diminishes their distinct worth and leaves fewer reminders of events. ELMALILI (author): While dictating, the debtor must fear God rather than the scribe and must not reduce any part of the creditor’s right. IBNASHUR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr takes both pronouns about fearing God and not reducing the amount to refer to the debtor, who must acknowledge the whole debt rather than shortchange the creditor. TABATABAI (author): He defines the key terms: mutual debt, dictation, shortchanging, weariness, causing harm, disobedience, and the two plural forms for pledged collateral. ASAD-NOTES (author): The instruction literally says not to diminish any part of the undertaking, whose wording is entrusted to the debtor as the weaker party. ASAD-NOTES (author): A debtor may be unable to dictate because of physical disability, difficulty understanding business terms, or unfamiliarity with the contract language; weakness of understanding or body includes minors and mentally diminished elders."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q25", "question": "Who is the سفِيه debtor?", "turns_on": "Whether foolishness denotes ignorance, wastefulness, childhood, or impairment.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q25/p1", "position": "A financially ignorant or imprudent person", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid explains the fool as someone ignorant about dictation and practical affairs. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers ignorance of right and wrong in dictation as the meaning of foolishness; it can describe any uninformed person, but the verse most directly concerns competent adults rather than children, who cannot transact debts. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is ignorant about dictating the debt; Ibn ʿAbbas and Saʿid ibn Jubayr report similarly. THALABI (مجاهد): Mujahid interprets a foolish debtor as someone ignorant about money. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is one ignorant of the correct way to dictate what he owes. MAWARDI-FULL (الشافعي): A foolish debtor may be one who squanders wealth and is corrupt in religion. MAWARDI-FULL (author): A foolish debtor may fail to understand the value of money and waste it instead of seeking to grow it. WAHIDI-BASIT (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets safīh as someone ignorant about dictating the debt. JISHUMI (مجاهد): Mujāhid glosses safīh as someone ignorant about dictation. BAGHAWI-FULL (مجاهد): Safīh means someone ignorant of how to dictate; al-Dahhak and al-Suddi say it means a young child; al-Shafiʿi says a squanderer who corrupts his property or religion. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A safīh is restricted for wastefulness and poor judgment; a weak person may be a child or confused elder, and inability to dictate may come from speech difficulty or muteness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): A safīh is someone with weak judgment about money who cannot manage either taking or giving; the term also applies when rights such as inheritance are apportioned. TABRISI (author): بخس is unjust diminution; safīh means ignorant or light-minded, named for the lightness of reason. TABRISI (القاضي): Al-Qāḍī differentiates the three: the foolish person squanders, the weak person is an adolescent, and the one unable to dictate is insane. TABRISI (author): The debtor may be a fool through ignorance, childhood, or impaired understanding; weak may mean intellectual disability or senility, and inability may mean madness, stammering, or muteness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid and Ibn Jubayr define the “foolish” debtor as ignorant about property and unable to dictate. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (القاضي أبو يعلى): Qadi Abu Yaʿla says foolish here means someone who squanders money. NASAFI-FULL (author): Safīh may mean mentally impaired or legally restrained for wastefulness and poor judgment; ḍaʿīf means a 
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
