<<chunk 28, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q19", "question": "May a scribe charge for writing?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q19/p1", "position": "Payment for a scribe depends on the legal status and burden of the work.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid says a requester harms a busy scribe or witness by insisting “fear God, you were commanded” when other people can be found; they need not interrupt their work or feel pressured. ZAJJAJ (الشاعر): An unnamed poet uses داينت ليلى for dealing with Layla in debts, then describes delay in repayment and partial payment. TABRISI (الجبائي): Al-Jubbāʾī allows a scribe and witness to take payment, while al-Ṭūsī says their school does not permit it; paper costs belong to the creditor. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن العربي): He says the command is guidance, so the writer need not write before being paid. QURTUBI-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): They say the order to write was abrogated by the prohibition against harming a writer or witness; al-Qurṭubī calls this remote because a universal obligation was never established and paid document-writing is permitted. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Scholars agree valid salam specifies described, commonly available food, measure, term, payment in known currency before the parties separate, and delivery place; he knows no scholar who invalidates such a contract. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Lā yuḍārr has two readings: scribes and witnesses must not refuse, distort, or alter testimony, or others must not harm them by disrupting duties, demanding extra travel, or withholding their fees and expenses. NASAFI-FULL (author): The active reading forbids a scribe or witness to refuse, distort, add, or omit; the passive forbids burdening them, rushing them from duties, withholding the scribe's fee, or making a witness bear travel costs. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali says the verse encourages kindness to scribes and witnesses and permits compensation when their work would otherwise damage their livelihood. BURSEVI (author): If active, the prohibition bars a scribe from refusing or altering the document and a witness from withholding testimony; if passive, it bars others from harming them while occupied or withholding their fee. ALUSI-FULL (author): If active, the verse forbids witnesses and scribes to refuse, distort, add, or subtract; if passive, it forbids burdening them, withholding the fee, or requiring costly travel. ALUSI-FULL (author): Some take saʾama as laziness by euphemism, since the Qurʾan describes hypocrites as praying lazily; a hadith says a believer should say prayer feels burdensome, not lazy. | mentions 4:142 ELMALILI (author): Alternatively, on the passive reading, scribes and witnesses themselves must not be harmed by excessive demands, interruption of important work, or denial of a scribe’s fee. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Whether a scribe may charge depends on whether writing is obligatory, since religious duties cannot be paid work but optional acts may be; the author deems abstention impermissible when capable writers are available, especially if no substitute exists and rights may be lost. STUDYQURAN (IK, Ṭ): The debtor described as feeble-minded, weak, or unable to dictate is interpreted respectively as mentally disabled, a minor, or incapacitated by illness."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q20", "question": "Why must the debtor dictate?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q20/p1", "position": "The liable debtor dictates so the record embodies his admission.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The debtor must dictate the record, fear God, and omit none of what is owed; the warning against shortchanging also appears in 7:85. | mentions 7:85 MUQATIL (author): If the debtor is ignorant, mentally impaired, weak, unable to dictate, or cannot speak, the creditor’s guardian dictates fairly, neither adding nor subtracting. TAB-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate the debt to the scribe and fear God by not diminishing the creditor's right; cheating the creditor will be answered for on the Day of Judgment. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says the debtor's dictation is obligatory and he must wrong the creditor in no amount. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd explains that the debtor must not reduce any part of the other man's right while dictating. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says that when the debtor cannot dictate, the creditor dictates fairly. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the guardian of a foolish or weak debtor is ordered to dictate fairly. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor must dictate to the scribe the amount of the debt he owes. IBNABIHATIM (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi interprets the debtor’s duty as acknowledging the debt, rather than literally dictating it. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is ignorant about dictating the debt; Ibn ʿAbbas and Saʿid ibn Jubayr report similarly. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The guardian of an incapable debtor must dictate the right owed with fairness; al-Dahhak agrees. THALABI (author): The debtor should dictate and acknowledge the debt himself because he knows what he owes; imlāl and imlāʾ are both proper Arabic forms. THALABI (author): The debtor's wali is his guardian or heir, who dictates impartially when the debtor cannot. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): A foolish debtor is one ignorant of the correct way to dictate what he owes. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the amount to the scribe and acknowledges it before the witness. MAWARDI-FULL (الطبري): A weak debtor may be unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The debtor dictates because the debt is being testified against him and his own words reveal what he owes. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Bakhs means diminution; the debtor must acknowledge the amount owed without reducing any part of it. WAHIDI-BASIT (صاحب النظم): The passage’s syntax confirms the dependent’s guardian: the debtor is the one who dictates, so his wali must be his representative; a creditor’s representative would have been framed like the earlier scribe. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): “As God taught him” recognizes God’s favor of literacy; the debtor dictates because he is liable and must acknowledge the debt aloud without reducing it. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): A child, incapacitated fool, mute, or speech-impaired debtor has a guardian—an heir or representative—dictate truthfully on his behalf. JISHUMI (author): The debtor should dictate by acknowledging in his own words what he owes, so the amount due is known. JISHUMI (author): The debtor must acknowledge the debt and bear witness against himself; the parties need document only enough testimony for reliable assurance. JISHUMI (author): The acknowledgment of an incapable or weak debtor is not accepted; his guardian dictates in his place. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate his own admission so his obligation is clear; imlāl and imlāʾ are two eloquent synonyms used in the Qur'an. | mentions 25:5 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The debtor alone dictates because the debt is witnessed against him as fixed in his liability and acknowledged by him. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The debtor is ordered to dictate because testimony reflects his own acknowledgment; a written document he acknowledges functions as his dictation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The debtor must be God-conscious while dictating and must not diminish any part of the right; baks is reduction through deception or evasion. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He rejects an attribution to Ibn Abbas allowing a creditor to dictate a foolish debtor’s debt: it would impose an unproven liability outside the law; at most it could concern illness preventing dictation, which the verse does not mean. TABRISI (author): The debtor's guardian may dictate; alternatively, Ibn ʿAbbās says the guardian here is the creditor, who knows the debt best. TABRISI (author): The debtor dictates and must fear God, reducing neither the amount nor the quality of what is owed. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the debtor cannot dictate because he is slow or tongue-tied; Ibn Jubayr says he cannot properly dictate what he owes, while Qadi Abu Yaʿla says he is insane. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd say the pronoun refers to the debtor, so his guardian dictates. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the debtor’s guardian: accepting the claimant’s dictation would leave no reason for writing and witnesses, and would simply accept the claimant’s word; Qadi Abu Yaʿla agrees. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid and Ibn Jubayr define the “foolish” debtor as ignorant about property and unable to dictate. RAZI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate an acknowledgment of the amount, kind, description, and due date so that the written contract is complete. RAZI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate without diminishing any amount owed; if the debtor is not competent to make a valid acknowledgment, the guardian’s acknowledgment counts. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The person who owes the debt is the debtor, and must dictate it aloud so his obligation is known. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates because the testimony follows his admission; he must fear God and not diminish the debt, since بَخْس means reduction, as also in 2:228. | mentions 2:228 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The verse distinguishes the independent debtor from three who cannot dictate: the fool, the weak-minded, and the person unable to dictate; debts can also arise through inheritance distributions. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The weak debtor is someone impaired in reason or nature and unable to dictate because of stammering, muteness, or inability to express himself; his guardian may be a father or trustee. QURTUBI-FULL (author): وليّه correctly refers to the debtor; having the creditor dictate a new liability for a fool would not be lawful, though a sick or mute person may hear a creditor's fair dictation and acknowledge it when complete. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Since the debtor is trusted to dictate, a pledgor's sworn account of the debt prevails while t
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
