<<chunk 28, part 4 of 0..5>>
ech difficulty or muteness", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (الطبري): A weak debtor may be unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī says weak refers to someone unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q27", "question": "What makes the debtor unable to dictate?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q27/p1", "position": "Inability includes speech, knowledge, absence, or other impediment.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): If the debtor is ignorant, mentally impaired, weak, unable to dictate, or cannot speak, the creditor’s guardian dictates fairly, neither adding nor subtracting. TAB-FULL (author): The fool can dictate but lacks sound judgment; the weak cannot dictate through a speech impediment or muteness; one unable to dictate is prevented by confinement or absence. In these cases the creditor dictates fairly. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says that when the debtor cannot dictate, the creditor dictates fairly. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Unable to dictate means unable to do so competently; al-Dahhak reports similarly. THALABI (السدي وابن زيد): Al-Suddi and Ibn Zayd explain inability to dictate as incapacity caused by muteness, confusion, absence, foreign speech, disability, confinement, or ignorance of the debt. MAWARDI-FULL (الطبري): A weak debtor may be unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس): One who cannot dictate may be unable to speak or mute. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One who cannot dictate may be prevented by imprisonment or by a disability. MAWARDI-FULL (author): One who cannot dictate may be mentally ill. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Someone unable to dictate may be mute, impaired, or ignorant of what he owns and owes. JISHUMI (author): Weak is explained as sick or senile with age; unable to dictate includes muteness, foreign speech, or similar inability. JISHUMI (author): Jishumi says the three categories should be understood as distinct to avoid repetition: mentally disabled, young, and unable to dictate, with comparable cases included under each. JISHUMI (القاضي): The Qāḍī’s preferred mapping is a spendthrift for safīh, an adolescent child for weak, and an insane person as unable to dictate; each label may include equivalents. JISHUMI (author): The author construes the foolish debtor as insane, the weak as a minor, and the unable speaker as mute or similarly unable. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Unable to dictate may mean mute, impaired, unable to speak Arabic, imprisoned, absent from the scribe, or ignorant of what is owed and owned. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A safīh is restricted for wastefulness and poor judgment; a weak person may be a child or confused elder, and inability to dictate may come from speech difficulty or muteness. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘He himself cannot dictate’ means he can dictate through another who interprets for him. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): One unable to dictate is a minor, whose guardian is a father or trustee; it can also be an absent person, with an agent as guardian, and a mute is best classed as unable. TABRISI (القاضي): Al-Qāḍī differentiates the three: the foolish person squanders, the weak person is an adolescent, and the one unable to dictate is insane. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says the debtor cannot dictate because he is slow or tongue-tied; Ibn Jubayr says he cannot properly dictate what he owes, while Qadi Abu Yaʿla says he is insane. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid and Ibn Jubayr define the “foolish” debtor as ignorant about property and unable to dictate. RAZI-FULL (author): The conjunction أو marks three distinct conditions: an adult with deficient judgment, someone lacking capacity such as a child or incapacitated elder, and someone unable to dictate because of speech or knowledge limitations. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The verse distinguishes the independent debtor from three who cannot dictate: the fool, the weak-minded, and the person unable to dictate; debts can also arise through inheritance distributions. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The weak debtor is someone impaired in reason or nature and unable to dictate because of stammering, muteness, or inability to express himself; his guardian may be a father or trustee. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The person unable to dictate includes a minor, whose guardian is a trustee or father, and an absent person unable due to illness or another excuse, whose guardian is an agent; a mute could fit either category but fits unable best. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A deficient debtor may be mentally unsound and profligate, a child or impaired elder, or unable to dictate because mute or ignorant of the language. NASAFI-FULL (author): When the debtor cannot dictate, the guardian who manages his affairs dictates truthfully and justly. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī says weak refers to someone unable to dictate because of speech difficulty or muteness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says inability to dictate can come from speech difficulty, muteness, or absence; others mention madness, ignorance of the account, or childhood. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The three categories are distinct: safīh is profligate or poor at managing money, weak has bodily impairment from childhood or advanced age, and inability to dictate is speech impairment or muteness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): The verse covers three recurrent cases: the financially incompetent spendthrift, the mentally deficient, and one unable to dictate because absent or ill; their guardians are respectively a guardian or executor, father or executor, and agent, with the mute among the weak or unable. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Emphasizing “he himself” removes a possible figurative reading and specifies that the debtor cannot dictate personally. SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): هو confirms the implicit subject of يمل to remove figurative attribution and specify that the debtor cannot dictate personally. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the debt and must fear God, withholding none of it; if the debtor is wasteful and legally restricted, young, insane, or unable to dictate through speech difficulty or ignorance, the guardian dictates fairly. BIQAI-FULL (author): Someone unable to dictate may be inarticulate, shy, or unable to speak Arabic; a guardian, trustee, judge, interpreter, or agent dictates fairly for that person. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding. BURSEVI (author): A person unable to dictate may also be hindered by ignorance or another impediment; a guardian then takes over. ALUSI-FULL (author): 'Weak' means a child or senile elder; inability to dictate may be muteness, as reported from Ibn ʿAbbās, or any impediment including unfamiliarity with the language. ALUSI-FULL (author): The pronoun hu either emphasizes inability to dictate personally, excluding figurative attribution, or serves as the subject with changed syntax to stress negation; his guardian then dictates fairly. ALUSI-FULL (author): The phrase about an incapable debtor restates the topic for clarity; 'foolish' can mean incompetent or foolish (Ibn Zayd), unable to dictate (Mujāhid), or wasteful and religiously corrupt (al-Shāfiʿī). ELMALILI (author): A debtor unable to dictate includes a spendthrift fool, a minor or mentally deficient person, or anyone unable because of muteness, stammering, ignorance, or another cause. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Safīh means cognitively impaired, ḍaʿīf means a minor, and one unable to dictate is incapacitated, such as someone simultaneously mute, blind, and deaf. | mentions 2:142, 2:266 TABATABAI (author): The explicit pronoun in “he cannot dictate” makes the debtor share the work with his guardian; unlike earlier cases, the guardian handles only what the debtor cannot. ASAD-NOTES (author): A debtor may be unable to dictate because of physical disability, difficulty understanding business terms, or unfamiliarity with the contract language; weakness of understanding or body includes minors and mentally diminished elders. STUDYQURAN (IK, Ṭ): The debtor described as feeble-minded, weak, or unable to dictate is interpreted respectively as mentally disabled, a minor, or incapacitated by illness."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q28", "question": "What does the emphatic هو add?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q28/p1", "position": "Huwa emphasizes the debtor's personal inability.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The word dَayn supplies the pronoun in fa-ktubūhu; it also disambiguates tadāyantum, emphasizes the reference, and generalizes to any size or type of debt. SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): The Sheikh calls the silent-hāʾ reading in هو more anomalous than ثم هو يوم القيامة; the author rejects that judgment. | mentions 28:6 SAMIN-DURR (author): The silent-hāʾ form is not anomalous: it is mutawatir from Nafi through Qalun and from al-Kisa'i. ALUSI-FULL (author): The pronoun hu either emphasizes inability to dictate personally, excluding figurative attribution, or serves as the subject with changed syntax to stress negation; his guardian then dictates fairly. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The explicit pronoun in the phrase about inability prepares for the guardian’s command, showing disability does not remove the requirement to document what the person borrows. TABATABAI (author): The explicit pronoun in “he cannot dictate” makes the debtor share the work with his guardian; unlike earlier cases, the guardian handles only what the debtor cannot. QIRAAT-ER (author): Abu Jaʿfar has a quiescent hāʾ in hwa rather than huwa, a rapid-recitation reduction with no semantic chan
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
