<<chunk 28, part 5 of 0..5>>
ge."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q29", "question": "Who is وليه?", "turns_on": "Whether the pronoun points to the debtor or creditor, and whether a claimant may establish liability.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q29/p1", "position": "The debtor's guardian or representative", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): The right-holder’s representative dictates for an incapable debtor and must be fair, matching the same no-increase, no-decrease standard imposed on the debtor. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the guardian of a foolish or weak debtor is ordered to dictate fairly. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd describes a weak debtor as unable to recognize and establish the other party's right, so his guardian acts in his place. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The guardian of an incapable debtor must dictate the right owed with fairness; al-Dahhak agrees. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): The guardian is the guardian of an orphan. THALABI (author): The debtor's wali is his guardian or heir, who dictates impartially when the debtor cannot. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج وصاحب النظم): Al-Zajjāj and the author of al-Naẓm prefer the guardian interpretation: 4:5 calls for guardians to manage dependents’ assets, and taking the creditor as wali would let a claimant’s assertion replace writing and witnesses. | mentions 4:5 WAHIDI-BASIT (صاحب النظم): The passage’s syntax confirms the dependent’s guardian: the debtor is the one who dictates, so his wali must be his representative; a creditor’s representative would have been framed like the earlier scribe. JISHUMI (author): The acknowledgment of an incapable or weak debtor is not accepted; his guardian dictates in his place. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): His guardian may mean his custodian; Ibn ʿAbbas and Muqatil identify the guardian as the creditor, who knows the claim and dictates fairly if the debtor cannot. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الطبري): Al-Tabari takes the pronoun in “his guardian” to refer to the right/debt and cites reports from al-Rabiʿ and Ibn Abbas. TABRISI (author): The debtor's guardian may dictate; alternatively, Ibn ʿAbbās says the guardian here is the creditor, who knows the debt best. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd say the pronoun refers to the debtor, so his guardian dictates. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the debtor’s guardian: accepting the claimant’s dictation would leave no reason for writing and witnesses, and would simply accept the claimant’s word; Qadi Abu Yaʿla agrees. QURTUBI-FULL (author): If وليّه means guardian, the verse implies that a guardian's acknowledgment is valid for the orphan under his care. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The weak debtor is someone impaired in reason or nature and unable to dictate because of stammering, muteness, or inability to express himself; his guardian may be a father or trustee. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Malik and one Shafi'i view restore guardianship if a released person becomes wasteful; Abu Hanifa says it cannot return, but al-Qurtubi cites the Quran's protection of wealth and its provision for a guardian when a debtor becomes foolish or weak. | mentions 4:5, 2:282 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “his guardian” refers to the debtor, one of the three vulnerable cases; al-Zamakhsharī identifies an executor, agent, or interpreter who dictates with the debtor's approval. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو موسى): A report says prayers are not answered for three: a man who keeps a badly behaved wife without divorcing her, a guardian who gives an orphan's wealth before maturity, and a lender who lends without witnesses. Al-Hakim calls its chain sound by the two Ṣaḥīḥ collections' criteria, but notes Shu'ba's companions stop it at Abu Musa and agree on a different report through that chain. BIQAI-FULL (author): The guardian must not wrong either the ward or creditor when speaking on the ward's behalf. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali compares a guardian's tongue speaking for a ward with God's words recited by human tongues, and likens the ward's limited capacity to needing a guardian's mature ability. | mentions 1:5, 2:257 ALUSI-FULL (author): The pronoun hu either emphasizes inability to dictate personally, excluding figurative attribution, or serves as the subject with changed syntax to stress negation; his guardian then dictates fairly. ELMALILI (author): The debtor’s guardian, trustee, agent, translator, or the creditor as debt-holder may dictate in the debtor’s place, fairly and justly. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The guardian’s declaration in the ward’s interest is valid when its basis is apparent; later jurists set it aside as a precaution against collusion that wastes vulnerable people’s property. TABATABAI (author): The explicit pronoun in “he cannot dictate” makes the debtor share the work with his guardian; unlike earlier cases, the guardian handles only what the debtor cannot. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس ومقاتل والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbas, Muqatil, and al-Rabiʿ say the wali is the creditor, but al-Razi rejects this because a claimant’s assertion alone would make documentation and witnesses pointless. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية، الراغب): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects attributing the creditor-as-guardian view to Ibn ʿAbbās because a creditor's dictation cannot establish a debt against a spendthrift; al-Rāghib likewise says a claimant's assertion has no force. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): He takes وليه to refer to the debt itself, with reports from al-Rabiʿ and Ibn ʿAbbās; al-Qurṭubī rejects this as unsound and says Ibn ʿAbbās's report is not reliable."}, {"id": "2:282/q29/p2", "position": "The creditor or holder of the right", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): The guardian may mean the claimant. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The guardian is the claimant, who must not add anything to the debt. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): The guardian who dictates may instead be the owner of the right, the creditor. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس والربيع ومقاتل): Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Rabīʿ, and Muqātil instead say the wali is the creditor, who knows the debt best. JISHUMI (ابن عباس والربيع ومقاتل): Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Rabīʿ, and Muqātil identify the guardian as the creditor, who knows the debt and dictates it fairly. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas, Ibn Jubayr, al-Rabiʿ, Muqatil, and Ibn Qutayba say the guardian is the creditor’s guardian, meaning the holder of the right. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī takes the pronoun to refer to the debt, making the guardian the creditor; this is also related from Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
