<<chunk 28, part 1 of 0..5>>
he collateral remains; most jurists and Ibn al-Mundhir agree because the creditor claims the excess, in keeping with the rule that the claimant bears proof and the defendant swears. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates because he acknowledges the claim and is the person testified against; imlāl and imlāʾ mean the same. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The command to fear God may address the debtor or scribe; neither may reduce any part of the debt or dictated statement. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A deficient debtor may be mentally unsound and profligate, a child or impaired elder, or unable to dictate because mute or ignorant of the language. NASAFI-FULL (author): The debtor must fear God, neither refusing to dictate in denial of the debt nor understating any part of it. NASAFI-FULL (author): When the debtor cannot dictate, the guardian who manages his affairs dictates truthfully and justly. NASAFI-FULL (author): The debtor, as the person liable and subject to testimony, must dictate, making the document his verbal admission; إملال and إملاء are synonymous forms. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Between you means between creditor and debtor, seller and buyer, or lender and borrower; both should be present so neither side is suspected of dictating a biased record. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate because the debt is owed from him and the written record safeguards the obligation against him. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The debtor must not diminish any amount through deception or resistance; the person ordered to dictate is assumed to control himself. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Emphasizing “he himself” removes a possible figurative reading and specifies that the debtor cannot dictate personally. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “his guardian” refers to the debtor, one of the three vulnerable cases; al-Zamakhsharī identifies an executor, agent, or interpreter who dictates with the debtor's approval. SAMIN-DURR (author): The implied meaning is that the debtor dictates the written amount due to the writer; أمللت عليه takes على with one of its objects. SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): هو confirms the implicit subject of يمل to remove figurative attribution and specify that the debtor cannot dictate personally. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the debt and must fear God, withholding none of it; if the debtor is wasteful and legally restricted, young, insane, or unable to dictate through speech difficulty or ignorance, the guardian dictates fairly. BIQAI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the obligation so the scribe and those present can witness what is owed. BIQAI-FULL (author): A foolish debtor lacks sound judgment, so his admission is not treated as reliable; a weak person may be temporarily ill, young, old, or otherwise impaired. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding. BURSEVI (author): The debtor should dictate because he is the party answerable and must acknowledge the obligation. BURSEVI (author): The debtor is especially warned to fear God and not reduce the dictated amount, since self-protection gives him an incentive to understate what he owes. ALUSI-FULL (author): The phrase about an incapable debtor restates the topic for clarity; 'foolish' can mean incompetent or foolish (Ibn Zayd), unable to dictate (Mujāhid), or wasteful and religiously corrupt (al-Shāfiʿī). ELMALILI (author): He defines imlāl as dictating from memory and infers that the debtor should propose and dictate the written debt record. ELMALILI (author): A debtor unable to dictate includes a spendthrift fool, a minor or mentally deficient person, or anyone unable because of muteness, stammering, ignorance, or another cause. ELMALILI (author): The debtor’s guardian, trustee, agent, translator, or the creditor as debt-holder may dictate in the debtor’s place, fairly and justly. ELMALILI (author): The debtor dictates the note because its contents constitute the debtor's acknowledgment and the witness statement is against that party. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Fal-yaktub follows from the refusal prohibition, restates fa-uktubūhu, and reinforces both the command and the ban; it is repeated to link naturally to the command that the debtor dictate. | mentions 7:148 IBNASHUR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr takes both pronouns about fearing God and not reducing the amount to refer to the debtor, who must acknowledge the whole debt rather than shortchange the creditor. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author rejects the debtor as antecedent: the creditor is present and could object to omission, so the two pronouns more plausibly refer to the scribe, who might overlook dictated details. ASAD-NOTES (author): A debtor may be unable to dictate because of physical disability, difficulty understanding business terms, or unfamiliarity with the contract language; weakness of understanding or body includes minors and mentally diminished elders. STUDYQURAN (IK, Ṭ): The debtor described as feeble-minded, weak, or unable to dictate is interpreted respectively as mentally disabled, a minor, or incapacitated by illness. STUDYQURAN (author): The debtor, broadly including a forward-sale seller, dictates the terms; commentators say the creditor may inflate the amount and the seller is usually weaker."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q21", "question": "What is إملال and how is it pronounced?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q21/p1", "position": "Imlāl and imlāʾ are Arabic forms for dictating.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): The debtor should dictate and acknowledge the debt himself because he knows what he owes; imlāl and imlāʾ are both proper Arabic forms. THALABI (author): The Qurʾanic use of imlāʾ is echoed by the description of scripture being dictated morning and evening. | mentions 25:5 THALABI (author): Imlāl originally means repeating something insistently; a cited poem uses أمل to describe time wearing down dwellings. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ says imlāl is the Ḥijāz and Banū Asad form, while imlāʾ is used by Tamīm and Qays; the Qur’an has both forms, as in 25:5. | mentions 25:5 JISHUMI (author): Imlāʾ and imlāl are two forms for dictating; imlāl fundamentally means repeating something again and again. | mentions 25:5 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate his own admission so his obligation is clear; imlāl and imlāʾ are two eloquent synonyms used in the Qur'an. | mentions 25:5 KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Imlāʾ and imlāl are two Arabic forms, both used in the Quran. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Amalla and amlā are two forms for dictating; the former is associated with the claimant repeating the statement at length. RAZI-FULL (الفراء): Al-Farraʾ notes that amlal and amla are dialectal alternatives: the first is associated with Hijaz and Banu Asad, the second with Tamim and Qays. | mentions 25:5 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The debtor dictates because he acknowledges the claim and is the person testified against; imlāl and imlāʾ mean the same. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A poetic line uses umlī to mean wearing something down over time; another account derives the form from amlal with lām changed to yāʾ for ease. SAMIN-DURR (author): وليملل is the command of أمل يمِل; with the second radical jussive, Hijazis use dissimilation and Tamimis assimilation, including in pause; وليمل is an anomalous assimilated reading. SAMIN-DURR (author): أمل and أملى both mean dictating; some call them dialects, others derive the yāʾ as a replacement for a doubled consonant, with repetition underlying both forms. | mentions 5:54 SAMIN-DURR (author): الحق may be a subject with عليه as a fronted predicate, or a subject governed by the preceding preposition; the relative debtor is the subject of يملل and its two objects are understood. BURHAN (ابن مالك): Ibn Malik says the Qur’an is mostly in the Hijazi dialect, with a few Tamimi forms: assimilation is Tamimi, while preserving doubled consonants, as in فليملل and يحلل, is common in Hijaz. | mentions 59:4, 5:54, 3:31, 3:125, 4:115, 8:13, 58:5, 19:75, 20:27, 20:31 ITQAN (جمال الدين بن مالك): Ibn Malik says the Quran is in Hijazi speech except a few Tamimi forms, including assimilation of jussive verbs; Hijazi unassimilated forms are common, as in وليملل. | mentions 11:87, 20:81 ALUSI-FULL (author): Imlāl means dictating to a scribe; the form alternates with imlāʾ through sound changes involving the doubled consonant and final hamza. ELMALILI (author): He defines imlāl as dictating from memory and infers that the debtor should propose and dictate the written debt record. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Amalla is the Hijazi and Banū Asad form, while amlā is Tamīmī; the Qur’an uses both forms, and amalla is original with lām changed to yāʾ for ease. | mentions 25:5"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q22", "question": "Who does عليه الحق identify?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q22/p1", "position": "The person upon whom the right rests is the debtor.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): وليّه means the guardian of the party whose right is owed. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers that the verse obligates an already appointed witness to perform testimony before an authority or judge who can secure the right owed. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The person who owes the debt is the debtor being discussed. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The guardian of an incapable debtor must dictate the right owed with fairness; al-Dahhak agrees. MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك وابن زيد): The guardian who dictates is the guardian of the person who owes the debt. JISHUMI (author): The pronoun in تكتبوه refers to the debt/right owed. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): When necessity or a real risk of losing a right arises, the recommendation approaches obligation; if delay will certainly destroy the right, testimony is obligatory, especially when it was already acquired and the summons is to deliver it, as a trust owed.
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
