<<chunk 29, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:282/q30", "question": "What legal authority does the guardian's dictation have?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q30/p1", "position": "The guardian dictates justly for the incapable debtor.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): If the debtor is ignorant, mentally impaired, weak, unable to dictate, or cannot speak, the creditor’s guardian dictates fairly, neither adding nor subtracting. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the guardian of a foolish or weak debtor is ordered to dictate fairly. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī says the guardian's dictation is to be done truthfully and in accordance with the right. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The guardian of an incapable debtor must dictate the right owed with fairness; al-Dahhak agrees. THALABI (الضحاك والسدي): Al-Dahhak and al-Suddi include a child or a weak person, such as an elderly person, among those needing a guardian to dictate. THALABI (author): The debtor's wali is his guardian or heir, who dictates impartially when the debtor cannot. MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك وابن زيد): The guardian who dictates is the guardian of the person who owes the debt. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس والربيع): The guardian who dictates may instead be the owner of the right, the creditor. WAHIDI-BASIT (صاحب النظم): The passage’s syntax confirms the dependent’s guardian: the debtor is the one who dictates, so his wali must be his representative; a creditor’s representative would have been framed like the earlier scribe. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): A child, incapacitated fool, mute, or speech-impaired debtor has a guardian—an heir or representative—dictate truthfully on his behalf. JISHUMI (الضحاك وابن زيد): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and Ibn Zayd say the guardian of the incompetent person dictates what that person owes, acting in his place. JISHUMI (ابن عباس والربيع ومقاتل): Ibn ʿAbbās, al-Rabīʿ, and Muqātil identify the guardian as the creditor, who knows the debt and dictates it fairly. JISHUMI (author): The acknowledgment of an incapable or weak debtor is not accepted; his guardian dictates in his place. JISHUMI (قيل): Some treat foolishness, weakness, and inability as three distinct causes; others treat them as one condition, with a guardian dictating in either case. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The guardian dictates for a restricted or minor person, an agent for someone unable, or an interpreter for a person who confirms his translation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-documentation verse was revealed specifically concerning forward sales (salam); Ibn ʿAṭiyya says such sales in Medina occasioned it, but the rule covers all debts by consensus. TABRISI (author): The debtor's guardian may dictate; alternatively, Ibn ʿAbbās says the guardian here is the creditor, who knows the debt best. TABRISI (author): Although Ibn ʿAbbās specifies forward sale, the verse's apparent scope includes every deferred debt, which commentators and jurists accept. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd say the pronoun refers to the debtor, so his guardian dictates. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the debtor’s guardian: accepting the claimant’s dictation would leave no reason for writing and witnesses, and would simply accept the claimant’s word; Qadi Abu Yaʿla agrees. QURTUBI-FULL (author): A transaction by an interdicted fool without the guardian's permission is invalid by consensus; an unimpaired but foolish person who has not been interdicted is discussed under Sūrat al-Nisāʾ. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): A guardian dictates for a child or impaired person; an agent or translator does so for someone unable, supporting representation in admissions, perhaps only for matters handled by that representative. NASAFI-FULL (author): When the debtor cannot dictate, the guardian who manages his affairs dictates truthfully and justly. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-document verse was revealed specifically about forward-sale transactions in Medina; consensus extends it to all debts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “his guardian” refers to the debtor, one of the three vulnerable cases; al-Zamakhsharī identifies an executor, agent, or interpreter who dictates with the debtor's approval. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the debt and must fear God, withholding none of it; if the debtor is wasteful and legally restricted, young, insane, or unable to dictate through speech difficulty or ignorance, the guardian dictates fairly. BIQAI-FULL (author): Someone unable to dictate may be inarticulate, shy, or unable to speak Arabic; a guardian, trustee, judge, interpreter, or agent dictates fairly for that person. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The debtor, meaning the person who owes the claim, must dictate it and must not reduce the claimant's due; if incompetent, weak, mute, or unable to dictate, a guardian dictates fairly without adding. BURSEVI (author): The person’s guardian, administrator, proxy, or translator dictates fairly, without increasing or reducing the amount. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās restricts the debt here to forward-sale debt, reporting that God set and permitted such a deferred transaction before reciting the verse. ALUSI-FULL (author): The pronoun hu either emphasizes inability to dictate personally, excluding figurative attribution, or serves as the subject with changed syntax to stress negation; his guardian then dictates fairly. ALUSI-FULL (author): The representative is whoever manages the incapable person's affairs, not only a formal guardian: the term includes a curator, agent, and translator; admitting for another here is valid, unlike admitting against another. ELMALILI (author): He says women are more inwardly oriented and less engaged with external affairs such as commerce and debts, which he regards as primarily men’s work. ELMALILI (author): The debtor’s guardian, trustee, agent, translator, or the creditor as debt-holder may dictate in the debtor’s place, fairly and justly. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The guardian’s declaration in the ward’s interest is valid when its basis is apparent; later jurists set it aside as a precaution against collusion that wastes vulnerable people’s property."}, {"id": "2:282/q30/p2", "position": "A guardian's acknowledgment can establish a ward's obligation", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The debtor must dictate without diminishing any amount owed; if the debtor is not competent to make a valid acknowledgment, the guardian’s acknowledgment counts. RAZI-FULL (author): For each of those three classes, the relevant guardian dictates fairly; the guardian of an incapacitated person can acknowledge debts as in the person’s other affairs. QURTUBI-FULL (author): If وليّه means guardian, the verse implies that a guardian's acknowledgment is valid for the orphan under his care."}, {"id": "2:282/q30/p3", "position": "A creditor's unilateral dictation cannot establish liability", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): His guardian may mean his custodian; Ibn ʿAbbas and Muqatil identify the guardian as the creditor, who knows the claim and dictates fairly if the debtor cannot. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية، الراغب): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects attributing the creditor-as-guardian view to Ibn ʿAbbās because a creditor's dictation cannot establish a debt against a spendthrift; al-Rāghib likewise says a claimant's assertion has no force."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q31", "question": "What does استشهدوا ask the parties to do?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q31/p1", "position": "Istashhidū means obtain or call witnesses.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers that the verse obligates an already appointed witness to perform testimony before an authority or judge who can secure the right owed. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī reasons that “the witnesses” names identifiable people already entrusted with testimony, as established by the earlier command to appoint them; it cannot mean everyone merely capable of witnessing. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī says an initial request to witness is obligatory only when no other suitable witness is available, by broader duties to preserve a fellow Muslim's right, not by this verse itself. TAB-FULL (author): Written documentation makes testimony more accurate because it preserves the parties' exact acknowledged words, keeps witnesses' accounts aligned, and makes judgment clearer; obeying God's command is itself more just than abandoning it. TAB-FULL (author): Writing every debt, large or small, makes the transaction more just, gives witnesses a sounder basis, and helps prevent doubt about the amount and due date. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid says a requester harms a busy scribe or witness by insisting “fear God, you were commanded” when other people can be found; they need not interrupt their work or feel pressured. TAB-FULL (author): The command is to appoint two witnesses over one's rights; “your men” means free Muslim men, excluding slaves and free non-Muslims. TAB-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Some readers of the light-kāf form interpret the two women's testimony together as equivalent to one man's, so each woman makes the other a “male” witness; this is reported from Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda urges reliance on God's assurance in documenting rights: writing protects property, benefits the pious, and makes even a wicked debtor more likely to pay because witnesses exist. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the clause forbids refusing an initial request to witness rights; he recounts a man calling through a large encampment with no one answering, and reads the verse as testifying for one person against another. TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says answering an initial request is optional when others are available, but
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
