<<chunk 29, part 4 of 0..4>>
ELMALILI (author): The wording “your men” excludes children and non-Muslim men’s testimony against Muslims as sufficient testimony."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q36", "question": "Can a blind or mute person testify?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q36/p1", "position": "The admissibility of blind or mute witnesses depends on the kind of knowledge available.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي وابن أبي ليلى وأبو يوسف): They accept testimony after blindness when the witness already knew the person before losing sight, analogizing the impairment to absence or death; al-Qurṭubī sees no reason to reject testimony previously borne while sighted and accepts public knowledge for lineage. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Some accept a blind person's voice-based testimony as certain, but al-Qurṭubī rejects this because it would imply that a sighted person could likewise rely on sound alone. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): Malik permits an established voice-based testimony by a blind person, including on divorce; Ibn Qasim reports him accepting testimony from a man who heard his neighbor divorce through a wall, with several early jurists sharing the view. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent requirement is simply that the two principal witnesses be men; jurists disagree over testimony by a blind witness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو حنيفة، محمد): They categorically reject testimony by a blind witness; the same view is narrated from ʿAlī, al-Ḥasan, Ibn Jubayr, and Iyās b. Muʿāwiya. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن أبي ليلى، أبو يوسف، الشافعي، زفر، شريح، الشعبي، مالك، الليث): They differ: Ibn Abī Laylā, Abū Yūsuf, and al-Shāfiʿī accept testimony learned before blindness; Zufar permits only lineage; Shurayḥ and al-Shaʿbī accept it generally; Mālik and al-Layth rely on voice recognition in some matters but reject testimony in adultery or false accusation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Some accept a mute witness through gestures and some reject the testimony; deaf witnesses are rejected for spoken claims but accepted for other sensory matters."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q37", "question": "When may one man and two women replace two men?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q37/p1", "position": "The alternative applies only when two men cannot be found", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): If two men cannot be found, the clause permits a man and two women; several nominative and accusative parses are grammatically possible. Approved witnesses are upright in religion and character. ZAJJAJ (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; ‘whom you approve’ means people whose standing or judgment you approve, implying some witnesses are not acceptable. THALABI (author): If two men are unavailable, the transaction may be witnessed by one man and two women. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; Abū Ḥanīfa accepts women’s testimony with men except in ḥudūd and retaliation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Some read the clause as meaning that two men cannot be found, so two women may be summoned only when no men are available; the author calls this weak and says the wording favors the majority. TABRISI (author): If two men are unavailable, the witness set is one man and two women whose outward probity and trustworthiness the parties accept; this makes justice a condition of testimony. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may testify; the source's school limits this to financial matters, while Abu Hanifa extends it outside fixed penalties and retaliation. NASAFI-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; male testimony with women is accepted outside fixed punishments and retaliation. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali sees the wording as broad accommodation for two women when two men cannot be found, while suggesting disagreement over cases where a man might be sought. BURSEVI (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness financial matters by consensus; women do not testify in fixed punishments or retaliation, where men are required."}, {"id": "2:282/q37/p2", "position": "One man and two women may be chosen even if two men exist", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): “If the two are not men” means if the two witnesses are not both men, not if two men cannot be found. QURTUBI-FULL (قول): Another parsing says the female witnesses may be used only when no men can be found; Ibn ʿAṭiyya calls this weak because the verse's apparent sense allows one man and two women even when two men are available."}, {"id": "2:282/q37/p3", "position": "One man and two women are the stated alternative to two men.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج والفراء وصاحب النظم): The phrase one man and two women can mean the witnesses sought should be one man and two women, let there be that combination, or let that number suffice; each syntactic paraphrase is sound."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q38", "question": "How is فرجل وامرأتان supplied syntactically?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q38/p1", "position": "An omitted verb or predicate supplies the nominal witness phrase.", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Adding wa-l-ṣaghīru wa-l-kabīru permits nominative because the phrase means “all of them.” SIBAWAYH (author): Some Arabs use nominatives such as متعرض or صادق والله; Sibawayh also explains غضب الخيل على اللجم through an implied verb, with some speakers raising it instead. SIBAWAYH (author): إن of condition does not directly govern a noun: any accusative or nominative after it depends on an omitted verb, while a genitive name belongs to a suppressed prepositional phrase such as مررت بزيد. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو الحسن): Abu al-Hasan supplies فليكن رجل وامرأتان; Abu Ali calls this a good analysis because it gives أن تضل an implied verb that raises the indefinite and governs the clause. FARISI-HUJJA (author): A third attachment is possible: أن تضل may depend on the predicate of an implied nominal clause, in addition to the implied command to witness or the verb فليشهد. FARISI-HUJJA (author): In 20:52, لا يضل ربي means the book does not go astray from my Lord. Here أن is accusative and attaches to one of the previously proposed implied verbs. | mentions 20:52 FARISI-HUJJA (author): ممن ترضون describes the nominative رجل وامرأتان, not the earlier accusative شهيدين; the case mismatch rules out the earlier noun phrase as its antecedent. THALABI (author): Small or large describes whether the debt or amount is slight or substantial; the forms can be parsed as circumstantial modifiers or as predicates of an implied kāna. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The purpose clause an taḍilla attaches to an implied command to seek one man and two women; it may attach to an implicit verb or to a supplied predicate. JISHUMI (علي بن عيسى): Ali ibn ʿIsa gives four sound expansions for the nominative phrase: let there be witnesses, let a man and two women testify, the witnesses are these, or they testify. BAGHAWI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads in tadhilla with kasra and fa-tadhakkara in the nominative, construing the phrase as a conditional continuation; the following verb is resumed after the conditional fa. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He gives three possible syntactic expansions for the nominative ‘a man and two women’: summon them, let them be, or have them testify; each supplies the governing verb for the purpose clause. TABRISI (author): With the nominative reading, كان means “occur” or “happen,” so the phrase means that a present trade occurs. RAZI-FULL (علي بن عيسى): Ali ibn ʿIsa gives four permissible implied predicates for the nominative phrase رجل وامرأتان, including let there be, let testify, or the witnesses are. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “One man and two women” admits several ellipses and parses: an omitted witness, a subject with omitted predicate, or a man as subject or passive object of an implied verb. SAMIN-DURR (السجاوندي): Al-Sajawandi treats ‘small or large’ as the predicate of an implied kāna; the author says this is unnecessary and unsupported here. SAMIN-DURR (author): The cited poetic phrase has an accusative after a comparative; one analysis supplies an implied verb indicated by the comparative. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari supplies فليشهد رجل, meaning let a man and two women testify; this avoids deleting a construct noun and is the best analysis. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya makes the conditional and answer a nominative adjective of the two women; the Sheikh objects to the awkward order and possible intervening phrase. BURHAN (author): Zarkashi rejects that necessity because the implied verbal noun in contracting a debt could itself supply the antecedent for the pronoun. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other grammarians make the implied subject refer to the transaction and treat trade as a verbal noun; most readers use the nominative, with trade as subject and the clause as predicate, or take kāna as complete. ALUSI-FULL (author): The object of writing may be the debt, right, or written record implied by the verb; the verb can take it directly, or an understood preposition may be omitted. IBNASHUR-FULL (سيبويه): Al-Sībawayh cites ʿAmr ibn Shās’s verse with an implied repeated subject and predicate as a parallel for the incomplete-kāna reading."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
