<<chunk 29, part 3 of 0..4>>
قهاء المجتهدين): Most jurists treat the commands as recommendations, citing Muslims’ customary deferred sales without records and the hardship obligatory documentation would cause. RAZI-FULL (author): One reading treats the ban on a writer’s refusal as guidance: writing for another Muslim is gratitude for God’s gift of literacy and legal knowledge. | mentions 28:77 RAZI-FULL (author): Min rijalikum is variously read as men of the Muslim community, free men, or men considered fit to testify because of justice. RAZI-FULL (author): The qualification ممن ترضون and the parallel divorce instruction show that not everyone may testify; jurists enumerate ten conditions, including freedom, adulthood, Islam, justice, knowledge, and lack of personal conflict or benefit. | mentions 65:2 QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): He says رجالكم means free men; Shurayh, Uthman al-Batti, Ahmad, Ishaq, and Abu Thawr accept an upright slave's testimony, unlike Malik, Abu Hanifa, al-Shafiʿi, and the majority; al-Qurṭubī prefers the majority, while al-Shaʿbi and al-Nakhaʿi permit slaves' testimony in minor matters. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور): The majority infer that probity is an additional qualification beyond being Muslim, since the verse requires witnesses whom people approve. QURTUBI-FULL (شريح وعثمان البتى وأبو ثور): Shurayḥ, ʿUthmān al-Battī, and Abū Thawr count Muslims as upright witnesses even if enslaved. NASAFI-FULL (author): Two witnesses are sought from believing men; Islam, freedom, and adulthood are conditions, while the author's school accepts non-Muslims testifying among themselves. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Addressing believers as “your men” indicates non-Muslims are not witnesses here; the verse does not address testimony among non-Muslims, which Abū Ḥanīfa allows even across religions. It also indicates adult male witnesses. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Another view requires ten traits: freedom, adulthood, Islam, integrity, knowledge, no personal gain or self-protection, no habitual error, preserved social decency, and no enmity toward the accused. SAMIN-DURR (author): The comparison’s second term is omitted because context supplies it: writing is more equitable, stable, and doubt-free than leaving the debt undocumented. NASHR (حذيفة بن اليمان): Around 30 AH, Ḥudhayfa saw Muslims in Armenia and Azerbaijan disputing whose recitation was more correct and urged ʿUthmān to intervene before they divided like Jews and Christians. BIQAI-FULL (author): The phrase your men implies Muslim witnesses and, by the verse's wording and conditions, free witnesses; the witness must be reliable and accepted. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The witnesses should be two free Muslim men or one man and two women; one woman may forget and the other remind her, and witnesses who hold testimony must respond when called. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Acceptable witnesses are two just, free Muslims. BURSEVI (author): ‘From your men’ means free adult Muslims of your community; in transactions between unbelievers or where the debtor is an unbeliever, unbelievers may be witnesses according to the author’s school. ALUSI-FULL (author): The expression 'from your men' is linked to the command or describes the witnesses partitivally; its address to believers is taken to imply Muslim, adult, male, and free witnesses, based on the customary sense of complete men. ALUSI-FULL (الإمامية): The Imāmīs, along with Shurayḥ, Ibn Sīrīn, Abū Thawr, and ʿUthmān al-Battī, do not require a witness to be free, provided he is Muslim and upright; this differs from the report that ʿAlī rejected slave testimony entirely. ELMALILI (author): The wording “your men” excludes children and non-Muslim men’s testimony against Muslims as sufficient testimony. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Men among you means adult Muslim men: the address is to believers, minors lack judgment to assess the circumstances and suspicions, and the wording of rijāl itself excludes women and boys. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author argues non-Muslims are excluded because religious difference prevents familiarity with one another’s integrity and duties; earlier religious communities did not clearly guarantee equal rights to outsiders. | mentions 3:75 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Qur’an alludes to non-Muslims’ asserted exemption from obligations toward the unlettered, as a reason not to rely on their testimony for Muslims. | mentions 3:75 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): The requirement for witnesses from among your men means they must be adults and Muslim men; jurists generally exclude non-Muslims from witnessing Muslim legal relations except a dying Muslim's will while travelling, arguing Muslims cannot reliably identify which non-Muslims will protect their rights. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli explained changing theological positions on divine essence and attributes, God's speech, predestination, and free will through changes in time, place, and social environment."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q34", "question": "May an enslaved man testify?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q34/p1", "position": "An upright enslaved Muslim may testify", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Most scholars require two free Muslim male witnesses, excluding slaves, children, and unbelievers; Shurayh and Ibn Sirin allow slave testimony. BAGHAWI-FULL (شريح وابن سيرين وأنس بن مالك): Most reject slave witnesses, but Shurayh, Ibn Sirin, and Anas allow them; Ibn ʿAbbas rejects children's testimony, and an insane person has no testimony. KASHSHAF-FULL (علي): ʿAlī rules that an enslaved person’s testimony is invalid in any matter. IBNATIYYA-FULL (شريح وإسحاق بن راهويه وأحمد بن حنبل): These jurists allow an enslaved person’s testimony when he is upright, giving priority to the verse’s wording. IBNATIYYA-FULL (مالك والشافعي وأبو حنيفة وجمهور العلماء): They disallow an enslaved person’s testimony, giving priority to the impairment of legal status. RAZI-FULL (شريح وابن سيرين وأحمد): Shurayh, Ibn Sirin, and Ahmad accept an enslaved man’s testimony, arguing that the verse is general and that intellect, religion, and justice—not legal status—prevent lying. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi calls the argument against slave testimony strong, while noting that the general wording can be restricted to people already recognized as qualified witnesses. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): He says رجالكم means free men; Shurayh, Uthman al-Batti, Ahmad, Ishaq, and Abu Thawr accept an upright slave's testimony, unlike Malik, Abu Hanifa, al-Shafiʿi, and the majority; al-Qurṭubī prefers the majority, while al-Shaʿbi and al-Nakhaʿi permit slaves' testimony in minor matters. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (شريح، ابن سيرين، ابن شبرمة، عثمان البتي): They accept a slave's testimony; reports also attribute acceptance to ʿAlī, with Ibrāhīm permitting testimony in trivial matters and Anas saying he knows no one who rejected it."}, {"id": "2:282/q34/p2", "position": "Enslaved testimony is excluded", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (الشافعي وأبو حنيفة): Al-Shafiʿi and Abu Hanifa reject an enslaved person as a witness, reasoning that the command to attend testimony cannot be obligatory for slaves. QURTUBI-FULL (author): He rejects slave testimony because the address concerns transacting believers, while slaves do not own such assets independently; he also invokes the later restriction on witnesses refusing a summons. QURTUBI-FULL (author): An enslaved person is excluded from the witness class because he cannot independently answer a summons, just as he lacks independent authority in other duties. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): The majority, including leading Ḥanafīs, Mālik, and al-Shāfiʿī, reject slave testimony in all matters; this is also narrated from ʿAlī, Ibn ʿAbbās, and al-Ḥasan. ALUSI-FULL (الإمامية): The Imāmīs, along with Shurayḥ, Ibn Sīrīn, Abū Thawr, and ʿUthmān al-Battī, do not require a witness to be free, provided he is Muslim and upright; this differs from the report that ʿAlī rejected slave testimony entirely."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q35", "question": "May children testify?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q35/p1", "position": "Children's testimony is generally excluded", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Children are not acceptable witnesses because they are not among those whose testimony is approved. BAGHAWI-FULL (شريح وابن سيرين وأنس بن مالك): Most reject slave witnesses, but Shurayh, Ibn Sirin, and Anas allow them; Ibn ʿAbbas rejects children's testimony, and an insane person has no testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي وأبو حنيفة وأصحابه): They reject children's testimony because children lack the qualifications of men, approved witnesses, and just adults named elsewhere in scripture. | mentions 5:95 DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Children's testimony is not admissible because they are not among the witnesses believers approve."}, {"id": "2:282/q35/p2", "position": "Children may testify in limited cases", "reasons": "JISHUMI (مالك): Mālik permits children’s testimony in cases of assault injuries. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Most scholars require two free Muslim male witnesses, excluding slaves, children, and unbelievers; Shurayh and Ibn Sirin allow slave testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): Malik permits children's testimony in injuries among children if they have not disagreed or separated; at least two are required, and ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr also judged by it, which Malik calls established practice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الثوري، أبو حنيفة وأصحابه، ابن شبرمة، الشافعي): They say children's testimony is not considered; Ibn Abī Laylā permits children's mutual testimony, and Mālik permits it in injuries under conditions."}, {"id": "2:282/q35/p3", "position": "Children normally lack the qualification to testify.", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Suspicion bars an enemy's testimony against an enemy and testimony for one's parents or children; it also bars a witness whose testimony gains benefit or averts harm for himself. 
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
