<<chunk 29, part 1 of 0..4>>
 obligatory if no other witness can be found. IBNABIHATIM (الربيع): The verse was revealed after people declined to help someone who went around seeking witnesses; Qatada reports similarly. FARISI-HUJJA (author): أن تضل cannot attach directly to استشهدوا شهيدين; the following alternative of one man and two women signals an omitted command to call those witnesses. THALABI (author): The sīn in استشهدوا marks a request: call for two witnesses. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The writing makes doubt less likely either about the debtor denying what is owed or about a witness erring. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Istashhidū means ashhidū, to call someone as witness; the saying that people testify but are not istushhidūn is explained as saying that they do not testify. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. JISHUMI (author): The instruction is to seek witnesses and have them testify to the written record; two men suffice generally, except that adultery requires four. JISHUMI (author): Some reject interpreting the call as bearing testimony because the people have not yet become witnesses; Jishumi answers that the command to seek two witnesses makes them witnesses. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Seek two male witnesses from believing men; most scholars require witnesses to be Muslim, free, and adult. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عكرمة): ʿIkrima reads the first rāʾ with kasra and makes “scribe” and “witness” accusative, so that the rights-holder is forbidden to begin harming them. TABRISI (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj says the first reading is clearer because deliberate falsification makes someone a wrongdoer more plausibly than summoning a busy witness does. RAZI-FULL (author): Accepting testimony is already included in the command to appoint two witnesses, so reading the later command as performance gives it a distinct legal function; concealing testimony is separately forbidden. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi rejects that interpretation as contrary to the general exegetical view: without a man, women’s testimony is not accepted, so the second woman does not simply make the first a witness. RAZI-FULL (ابن عباس ومقاتل والربيع): Ibn ʿAbbas, Muqatil, and al-Rabiʿ say the wali is the creditor, but al-Razi rejects this because a claimant’s assertion alone would make documentation and witnesses pointless. RAZI-FULL (author): The purpose of witnesses is to let the creditor establish the claim if the debtor later denies it; istashhidu means make someone testify, and shahidayn means two witnesses. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Seeking witnesses is recommended, not obligatory, as al-Qurṭubī explains later. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Because testimony is a grave authority that makes another person liable, God requires approved and upright witnesses with distinguishing qualities. QURTUBI-FULL (قتادة والربيع وابن عباس): Qatāda, al-Rabīʿ, and Ibn ʿAbbās interpret the summons as a request to bear witness and enter it in writing. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets the summons as a request to give testimony already held; he and others say an initial invitation to witness may be declined. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Seek two witnesses” is a request for testimony or equivalent to “make two witnesses”; shahīd is intensive, suggesting experienced witnesses whose repeated use indicates acceptance and integrity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Among witnesses whom you approve” most likely modifies “seek witnesses,” applying approval to all combinations; adjective and substitution analyses are weak. SAMIN-DURR (author): استشهدوا may retain the request sense of استفعل, or استفعل may mean أفعل, as in استعجل/أعجل and استيقن/أيقن. SAMIN-DURR (author): من رجالكم may attach to استشهدوا with من marking source, or be an adjective of شهيدين with partitive من. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa notes that an accusative reading would imply فاستشهدوا. SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): The Sheikh attaches ممن ترضون directly to استشهدوا so the qualification applies to every witness; its late position signals this scope. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Other reports condemn witnesses who testify before being asked, whose oaths and testimony precede each other, or who testify without a request; these are false witnesses. BIQAI-FULL (author): Writing and testimony are not automatically linked, so the verse separately directs people to seek two witnesses, with the word shahid emphasizing established insight and experience. DURR-FULL (ابن عباس): Debt should be witnessed to prevent denial or forgetting; someone who refuses a needed request to testify despite holding evidence disobeys, while a requester must not burden a scribe or witness when another is available. ITQAN (author): One explanation takes the dual phrase as covering two or more by naming the minimum; the better analysis makes the pronoun refer back to the two witnesses already mentioned without qualification. ALUSI-FULL (أبو حيان): The phrase 'from those you approve' can modify the male-and-female pair, the two male witnesses, or all solicited witnesses; Abū Ḥayyān attaches it to 'seek witnesses,' which al-Alusi says awkwardly separates the women's provision from its rationale. ALUSI-FULL (author): Istashhidū means request two people to bear witness to the transaction; alternatively its extra sīn and tāʾ may be redundant and mean simply 'witness.' The intensive noun suggests experienced, capable witnesses and may hint at recognized reliability. ALUSI-FULL (author): The command to seek witnesses is considered recommended or obligatory according to the broader disagreement over these commands. ALUSI-FULL (author): If two men are not sought, the alternatives can be parsed elliptically as one man and two women testifying, serving as witnesses, or being requested as witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other analyses make the exception detached from both writing and witnessing, or attach it to both; al-Alusi favors the first analysis. ELMALILI (author): Justice is also required by the instruction in 65:2 to appoint two just witnesses from among you. | mentions 65:2 ELMALILI (author): For any sale, including a cash sale, make it openly in the presence of witnesses rather than secretly; this precaution protects property and legal security. ELMALILI (author): Qatada relates that the verse was revealed after a man went from camp to camp seeking a witness and no one paid attention. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The documentation rule extends to all transactions for which parties seek written records and witnesses. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Istashhidū can mean simply have witnesses, with the s and t adding emphasis, or request two witnesses, making the creditor responsible for seeking testimony. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The creditor’s request is within a person’s capacity; the following ban on refusing then addresses the person asked to witness. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حنيفة): The author applies the earlier disagreement about scribes: accepting the request to bear witness becomes individual when designated, and giving testimony is individually obligatory if it causes no bodily or financial harm; Abū Ḥanīfa makes performance communal unless uniquely required, subject to court integrity, proximity, admissibility, and a claimant’s request."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q32", "question": "Must a debt have witnesses as well as writing?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q32/p1", "position": "Witnesses are an additional safeguard for deferred debt.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī treat witnessing at sale as recommended or optional, citing the permission to rely on trust. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that witnessing every purchase and sale is an obligatory duty, because divine commands bind unless evidence shows a recommendation; he rejects abrogation by the trust clause. | mentions 2:283 IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Writing and witnessing debts prevents denial and forgetfulness; one who fails to witness has disobeyed. NAHHAS (الفراء): Some say recording deferred debts and witnessing sales are recommendations, by analogy with commands that grant permission after a prohibition. | mentions 2:282 NAHHAS (عبد الله بن عمر): Ibn Umar says witnessing is obligatory for every sale, large or small, citing the command to witness sales. | mentions 2:282 THALABI (الضحاك ومحمد بن جرير): Al-Dahhak treats witnessing as a firm divine command for every transaction, small or large and cash or deferred; Muhammad ibn Jarir prefers this view. THALABI (آخرون): Other scholars treat witnessing sales as recommended, leaving the parties free to call witnesses or not. MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك وداود بن علي): Witnessing sales is obligatory. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي ومالك والشافعي): Witnessing sales is recommended. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء وابن جريج وإبراهيم وابن جرير): A group, chosen by Ibn Jarīr, treat writing and witnessing deferred debts as obligatory to protect wealth and deter denial; Ibrāhīm says even a tiny handful of greens should be documented. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): An immediate exchange of goods is exempt from writing because the risks of delayed payment are absent; witnessing spot sales is also no longer obligatory under the abrogated ruling. JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
