<<chunk 29, part 2 of 0..4>>
 rights. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (الحسن والشافعي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shāfiʿī regard witnessing sales as recommended, which Jishumi says is the jurists’ position. JISHUMI (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing a sale obligatory. JISHUMI (author): The term must be known: that is the force of specified, and an unknown term defeats the purpose of writing and witnessing. JISHUMI (author): Writing and witnessing are guidance and recommendation, not obligation, since a creditor may waive the right itself and need not document it as a precaution. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some consider writing obligatory, but most deem the command recommendatory; al-Shaʿbi says writing, witnessing, and pledging were obligatory then abrogated by the trust provision. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi holds that writing, witnessing, and pledging were initially obligatory and that the instruction to fulfill a trusted deposit abrogated all three. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He considers witnessing a binding command for both small and large transactions, cash or credit; Abu Saʿid al-Khudri leaves it to mutual trust, while others call it recommended. | mentions 2:283 KASHSHAF-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing obligatory even for a bunch of greens. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The sound view is that witnessing makes a transaction prudent while mutual trust leaves room; no abrogation follows, because documentation is recommended as a precaution for rights people may waive, and 2:283 instructs debtors to repay when trusted. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan, al-Shaʿbī, and others say witnessing a transaction is recommended; Ibn ʿAmr and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say it is obligatory, followed by Ibn ʿUmar's practice and ʿAṭāʾ, with al-Ṭabarī preferring obligation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds obligation untenable: witnessing tiny sales is burdensome, while larger dealings may rely on social trust or customary practice. He prefers recommendation unless an excuse prevents it. TABRISI (الحسن وجميع الفقهاء): Al-Ḥasan and the jurists regard witnessing sales as recommended; the Ẓāhirīs make it obligatory. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Witnessing is recommended for transactions where it is customary. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الجمهور): The majority treat writing debts and witnessing sales or debts as recommended, so the command remains operative without abrogation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عمر): A group including Ibn ʿUmar, Abu Musa, Mujahid, Ibn Sirin, and others regard writing and witnessing as obligatory. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Qaffal takes ذالكم as referring to the commanded writing and witnessing; writing is more just because it is closer to certainty and truth and further from ignorance and falsehood. | mentions 60:8, 49:9, 33:5 RAZI-FULL (عطاء وابن جريج والنخعي والطبري): ʿAtaʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿi, and al-Tabari hold that writing and witnessing deferred debts are obligatory; al-Nakhaʿi even requires witnessing a tiny vegetable purchase. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī reads the witnessing command as covering small and large sales; Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, and others hold it obligatory, and ʿAṭāʾ demands witnesses for tiny purchases. QURTUBI-FULL (الشعبي والحسن): Al-Shaʿbī and al-Ḥasan treat witnessing as recommendation and guidance rather than a binding duty; Mālik, al-Shāfiʿī, and other jurists are also said to hold this. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds mandatory witnessing impractical for small sales and sometimes socially awkward; he treats it as recommended for its usual benefit unless an excuse intervenes. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī rejects abrogation: the pledge clause addresses inability to find a scribe and an unrequired pledge, a different case from writing and witnessing. | mentions 2:283, 4:43, 5:6 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt verse is established, not abrogated, and writing, pledges, and witnesses are alternative means of securing debt; witnessing is recommended like pledging. | mentions 2:283 NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnessing sales is recommended for immediate and deferred exchanges as a precaution, or the command concerns immediate trade alone, where testimony suffices without writing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The sequence moves from obedience to God's just judgment, to reliable testimony, to eliminating doubt; writing and witnessing reassure the parties. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Witnessing all sales, immediate or deferred, is safer against disagreement; another interpretation limits the command to present trade. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري، ابن عمر، الضحاك، ابن المسيب، جابر بن زيد، مجاهد، عطاء، إبراهيم، الشعبي، النخعي، داود بن علي): They hold witnessing obligatory; al-Ḍaḥḥāk requires it even for greens and ʿAṭāʾ for any price. Al-Ṭabarī says an unwitnessed sale defies God's Book. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority treats witnessing sales as guidance and recommendation, not obligation; the report of the Prophet's disputed horse purchase and Khuzaima's extraordinary testimony supports this. ALUSI-FULL (author): Writing and witnessing make doubts about a debt’s kind, amount, and maturity less likely; the omitted preposition before an taرتابوا is variously understood as ila, lam, min, or fi. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other analyses make the exception detached from both writing and witnessing, or attach it to both; al-Alusi favors the first analysis. ELMALILI (author): The majority of exegetes regard witnessing a sale here as a recommendation for precaution. IBNASHUR-FULL (جمهور السلف): The majority of early authorities interpret the command to obtain two witnesses as obligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): The later majority of jurists, including Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; the discussion continues at the command to witness sales. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري): Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, Abū Saʿīd, Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib, Mujāhid, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, ʿAṭāʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿī, Jābir ibn Zayd, Dāwūd, and al-Ṭabarī take witnessing at sales as obligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī, followed by Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; they cite the Prophet’s sales without witnesses. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Writing and witnessing are both required because they complement one another in securing the transaction rather than substitute for one another."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q33", "question": "Which men qualify as witnesses?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q33/p1", "position": "The men are qualified members of the believing community.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): The command is to appoint two witnesses over one's rights; “your men” means free Muslim men, excluding slaves and free non-Muslims. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid glosses “your men” as free men. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): The two male witnesses must be free men, not slaves. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The male witnesses must be free Muslims. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): A needed Muslim may not refuse a summons either to give testimony about another witness or to provide testimony already in his possession; al-Hasan says the verse covers both situations. THALABI (مالك والشافعي وأبو حنيفة وسفيان وأكثر الفقهاء): The required male witnesses are free adult Muslims, excluding slaves, minors, and free non-Muslims. THALABI (author): An acceptable witness must meet ten conditions: freedom, adulthood, Islam, uprightness, knowledge of the matter, no personal gain or avoidance of harm, few errors, proper social conduct, no excessive leniency, and no adverse testimony from his slave. THALABI (آخرون): Other scholars treat witnessing sales as recommended, leaving the parties free to call witnesses or not. MAWARDI-FULL (الجمهور): Acceptable witnesses are free, Muslim, upright people. MAWARDI-FULL (شريح وعثمان البتي وأبو ثور): Acceptable Muslim witnesses may be upright even if enslaved. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The two men are free, adult members of the believers’ community, excluding children and enslaved people. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The source lists ten qualities for an admissible witness: freedom, adulthood, Islam, uprightness, knowledge, no self-serving interest or self-protective motive, no frequent error, no breach of propriety, and no enmity with the party testified against. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses are two free adult men of the believers, acceptable for their merit and religion; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her of the testimony. JISHUMI (مجاهد وجماعة من الفقهاء): Mujāhid and many jurists restrict the male witnesses to free, adult Muslims, excluding non-Muslims, slaves, and children. JISHUMI (author): A witness should meet ten qualities: freedom, adulthood, Islam, integrity, knowledge of the testimony, no self-interest or self-protection, few errors, manly virtue, alertness, and not being heedless. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Most scholars require two free Muslim male witnesses, excluding slaves, children, and unbelievers; Shurayh and Ibn Sirin allow slave testimony. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): A witness must be approved in religion and trustworthiness; seven qualifications are Islam, freedom, sound mind, adulthood, uprightness, social propriety, and absence of suspicion. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Seek two male witnesses from believing men; most scholars require witnesses to be Muslim, free, and adult. KASHSHAF-FULL (أبو حنيفة): Abū Ḥanīfa permits non-Muslims to testify within their own religious communities. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The phrase ‘from your men’ excludes unbelievers, children, and women, while its wording includes enslaved men. TABRISI (مجاهد): Mujāhid limits the two male witnesses to free, adult, Muslim men; al-Ṭabrisī rejects freedom as a condition, requiring Islam and probity instead. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (مجاهد): Mujahid says “your men” means free men. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj and Qadi Abu Yaʿla take “your men” to mean Muslims, supported by the verse’s opening address to believers. RAZI-FULL (جمهور الف
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
