<<chunk 30, part 3 of 0..5>>
ن; the Sheikh rejects this because it would exclude the two male witnesses."}, {"id": "2:282/q42/p4", "position": "The address is to judges", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (ابن بكير): Ibn Bukayr and others take the address requiring approved witnesses to be directed to judges. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The address in “you approve” is apparently to believers, implying that witnesses are not presumed upright by status alone; other views address judges or creditors."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q43", "question": "Why are two women specified?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q43/p1", "position": "Two women allow one to remind the other if memory fails.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): For a debt, use two acceptable male witnesses or one man and two women; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her, and a summoned witness should serve when free. TAB-FULL (author): Most Hijaz, Medina, and some Iraqi reciters read “an taḍilla” with open أن and subjunctive verbs, meaning the second woman reminds the first if she errs; the wording places the reminder after the error for its intended sense. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ explains that one woman may forget and the other reminds her. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says one woman may forget the testimony and the other reminds her. ZAJJAJ (بعض أهل اللغة): For the majority’s open أن reading, some grammarians posit a condition moved forward: appoint two women so the remembering one can remind the forgetful one. ZAJJAJ (سيبويه والخليل وجميع النحويين الموثوق بعلمهم): The reliable grammarians take أن as purpose: appoint two women so one can remind the other; forgetting is mentioned because it causes the reminder. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): If one of the two women forgets, the other reminds her; Saʿid ibn Jubayr, al-Rabiʿ, al-Suddi, Muqatil, and al-Dahhak report similarly. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): One of the women reminding the other means she makes her remember. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The testimony is called so one woman may forget and the other remind her; as Sibawayh explains, forgetting is the cause that makes reminding necessary, not the intended outcome. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): An is accusative with a purpose sense: call two women as witnesses so that one can remind the other. WAHIDI-BASIT (المفسرون): Exegetes reject the male-equivalence interpretation: women without a man still cannot testify, forgetting should be paired with its opposite, remembering, and equal male status would apply across all legal rulings. DAMGHANI (author): Ḍalāl can mean forgetting; one of the two women may forget. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The majority read an tadhilla in the subjunctive, coordinated with fa-tadhakkara, meaning one woman may forget her testimony and the other remind her of the hearing. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The purpose clause does not mean that testimony is taken in order for a woman to err; two women are appointed so one can remind the other if she forgets. Sibawayh compares this construction to preparing a prop for a wall if it leans. TABRISI (author): The particle أن is accusative here, with the sense “because one woman may forget, then the other remind her.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj says the construction means appoint two women so that one may remind the other, or for that purpose. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): The majority take the light and doubled readings alike: the second woman recalls the matter after the first forgets. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو علي): Abu ʿAli rejects Ibn ʿUyayna’s view: no number of women’s testimony suffices without a man, and forgetfulness should be answered by a reminder. RAZI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn ʿUyayna interprets the second woman as making the first a male-equivalent witness, rather than reminding her of forgotten testimony. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi explains the two-women provision by saying a second woman can prompt the first if she forgets, which he attributes to women’s bodily temperament. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The verse's explanation implies women's lesser reason and memory; it expresses reminder through its cause, like preparing a weapon to repel an enemy if one comes. NASAFI-FULL (author): The two-witness clause explains that one woman may forget the testimony and the other remind her; Ḥamza reads the verb with nominative and gemination under the conditional, while Makki and Baṣri read it accusatively from dhikr. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He agrees with al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya: the reading fails linguistically because the verb is not recorded with that causative sense, and logically because both women's testimony, not one woman's reminder, would make the equivalent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قيل): An interpretation links women's forgetfulness to cold and moisture, says one woman's forgetting is more likely than both forgetting, and infers men's superiority. SAMIN-DURR (الأصمعي): Al-Asma'i transmits from Abu Amr two readings of meaning: doubled فتذكر recalls after forgetting, while light فتذكر makes the second woman a reminder by joining her testimony. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): If one woman forgets, the other reminds her; another reading intensifies the verb. Ibn Kathir rejects the claim that having two women together makes them equivalent to a man and prefers the reminder interpretation. BURHAN (author): The two women serve to ensure reminder, not to cause error; since forgetting triggers the other’s reminder, the cause is put in place of the intended outcome. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali says the readings with light and doubled consonants distinguish women who forget once from those who repeatedly forget; either may forget different details, allowing mutual correction. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The witnesses should be two free Muslim men or one man and two women; one woman may forget and the other remind her, and witnesses who hold testimony must respond when called. BURSEVI (author): One woman may forget and the other remind her; reminder is the real purpose, while possible error is named as its cause, as in preparing a weapon to repel a possible enemy. ALUSI-FULL (بعض المحققين): Some exacting grammarians prefer an implicit dual pronoun after the fa: then the two women remind one another. ELMALILI (author): He generalizes that women’s retention is weaker and forgetfulness more likely than men’s, while allowing individual exceptions and treating gender and the majority as the legal reference. ELMALILI (author): He attributes women’s alleged forgetfulness partly to greater sensitivity and emotional impressions, which can weaken recall even in intelligent people. ELMALILI (author): He says modesty and reserve predominate in women and should do so, and that even a small engagement diminishes their distinct worth and leaves fewer reminders of events. ELMALILI (author): He treats women’s comparatively lower retention of external events as a consequence of their sex-specific nature, while saying a woman who later recalls an event fully can testify. ELMALILI (author): Two women can confer before testifying and remind one another without outside prompting, strengthening their recall and preserving both their dignity and the right entrusted to them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The two women provide a safeguard against confusion or forgetting, which the author describes as more common among women by ordinary disposition; ḍalāl here means forgetfulness. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author prefers a compound-cause account: the wording concisely expresses both avoiding loss when one woman forgets and gaining the benefit of the second woman’s reminder, better than al-Zamakhsharī’s account."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q44", "question": "Does the provision imply women are intrinsically deficient?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q44/p1", "position": "The rule reflects an intrinsic weakness in women's memory or judgment", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi explains the two-women provision by saying a second woman can prompt the first if she forgets, which he attributes to women’s bodily temperament. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The verse's explanation implies women's lesser reason and memory; it expresses reminder through its cause, like preparing a weapon to repel an enemy if one comes. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Witnesses accompany writing for additional assurance. In financial matters, one man and two women may testify; Ibn Kathir connects this arrangement to a hadith describing women's testimony as half a man's and explaining their lesser reason and religious practice. ALUSI-FULL (author): The two-woman provision explains the testimony rule: if one forgets, the other reminds her; al-Alusi attributes forgetfulness to women’s temperaments."}, {"id": "2:282/q44/p2", "position": "It addresses usual social experience, not intrinsic inferiority", "reasons": "ASAD-NOTES (author): The two-women provision does not question women’s moral or intellectual ability; Asad, citing ‘Abduh, attributes it to women’s usual lack of experience with business procedures and greater risk of mistakes. STUDYQURAN (author): The verse does not demand an inference of female inferiority; its described transaction allows two women to arrange a sale and use two men as witnesses. STUDYQURAN (author): Because women of the time generally lacked experience with complex finance, two women could make testimony more practical and protect them from bullying or manipulation, rather than indicting their reliability."}, {"id": "2:282/q44/p3", "position": "The rationale is disputed between inherent and contextual explanations.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): He attributes women’s alleged forgetfulness partly to greater sensitivity and emotional impressions, which can weaken recall even in intelligent people. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Financial testimony requires either two men or one man and two women, as a precaution to protect rights rather than because women are intellectually or morally deficient; the second woman helps th
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
