<<chunk 30, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q39", "question": "In which cases may women testify?", "turns_on": "Which legal matters the financial witness formula covers.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q39/p1", "position": "The formula expressly admits one man and two women in property matters.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Some readers of the light-kāf form interpret the two women's testimony together as equivalent to one man's, so each woman makes the other a “male” witness; this is reported from Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah. FARISI-HUJJA (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn Uyayna interprets the phrase as one woman making the other a reminder, but Abu Ali judges this weak because women still need a man for a valid testimony. MAWARDI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): One woman reminding the other may mean making her count like a male witness. WAHIDI-BASIT (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyān ibn ʿUyayna instead interprets it as making the other woman a male witness, so their joint testimony counts as a man’s; this is also attributed to Abū ʿAmr ibn al-ʿAlāʾ and reported through a narration. WAHIDI-BASIT (المفسرون): Exegetes reject the male-equivalence interpretation: women without a man still cannot testify, forgetting should be paired with its opposite, remembering, and equal male status would apply across all legal rulings. JISHUMI (علي بن عيسى): Ali ibn ʿIsa gives four sound expansions for the nominative phrase: let there be witnesses, let a man and two women testify, the witnesses are these, or they testify. JISHUMI (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyān ibn ʿUyayna instead understands the reminder as making one woman like a male witness. BAGHAWI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): He interprets the wording as making one woman the equivalent of a male witness, but the author prefers the reminder interpretation because it is coordinated with forgetting. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He gives three possible syntactic expansions for the nominative ‘a man and two women’: summon them, let them be, or have them testify; each supplies the governing verb for the purpose clause. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn ʿUyayna and al-Asmaʿi’s report from Abu ʿAmr take the light reading to make two women’s testimony equivalent to one man’s; Qadi Abu Yaʿla prefers this. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو علي): Abu ʿAli rejects Ibn ʿUyayna’s view: no number of women’s testimony suffices without a man, and forgetfulness should be answered by a reminder. RAZI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn ʿUyayna interprets the second woman as making the first a male-equivalent witness, rather than reminding her of forgotten testimony. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi rejects that interpretation as contrary to the general exegetical view: without a man, women’s testimony is not accepted, so the second woman does not simply make the first a witness. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Because two women replace one man, he reasons by analogy that their testimony can be accompanied by an oath just as one man's testimony can; al-Shafiʿi agrees, while Abu Hanifa and his companions reject the oath as an extra division beyond the text. QURTUBI-FULL (المهدوي): Al-Mahdawī says most jurists reject women's testimony in criminal penalties, marriage, and divorce, and do not let them transmit testimony where they cannot testify directly. QURTUBI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة وأبو عمرو بن العلاء): Ibn ʿUyayna and Abū ʿAmr understand the lighter reading of the reminder verb as returning a woman's testimony to memory, so two women's testimony totals a man's. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو حنيفة، أبو يوسف، محمد، زفر، عثمان البتي): They reject women's testimony with men in penalties and retaliation but accept it for other rights. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو عمرو بن العلاء، سفيان بن عيينة): They explain the light reading as making the two women's combined testimony equivalent to a man's; al-Zamakhsharī calls this aberrant and Ibn ʿAṭiyya distant and wrong. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He agrees with al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya: the reading fails linguistically because the verb is not recorded with that causative sense, and logically because both women's testimony, not one woman's reminder, would make the equivalent. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): An eccentric interpretation takes فتذكر to mean making the other woman a male witness, so their joint testimony equals a man's. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Zamakhshari calls making one woman a male witness a far-fetched interpretation, without limiting the criticism to one reading. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari supplies فليشهد رجل, meaning let a man and two women testify; this avoids deleting a construct noun and is the best analysis. BIQAI-FULL (author): The two women must be among those whose uprightness is approved; testimony is penetrating perception of hidden meaning through an apparent form. ALUSI-FULL (حسين بن علي المغربي): Al-Maghribi takes the first one of them as one of the two testimonies and the second as one of the two women, so one woman recalls the forgotten testimony. ELMALILI (author): He calls a woman’s becoming manlike a degradation and says both feminized men’s and masculinized women’s testimony is inadmissible because they depart from their sex-specific perfection and may distort truth. ELMALILI (author): He treats women’s comparatively lower retention of external events as a consequence of their sex-specific nature, while saying a woman who later recalls an event fully can testify. ELMALILI (author): Two women can confer before testifying and remind one another without outside prompting, strengthening their recall and preserving both their dignity and the right entrusted to them. IBNASHUR-FULL (الخفاجي): Al-Khafājī says the repetition conveys generality: either woman may forget or remind, so neither is merely a secondary reminder rather than a witness in her own right. STUDYQURAN (author): Other verses give equal consideration to male and female testimony in accusations of adultery by either spouse. | mentions 24:6, 24:9"}, {"id": "2:282/q39/p2", "position": "One man and two women may testify in financial matters", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): For a debt, use two acceptable male witnesses or one man and two women; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her, and a summoned witness should serve when free. THALABI (author): Jurists agree that women may testify alongside men in property matters, but dispute other matters: Malik and several others limit them to property, while Abu Hanifa and Sufyan allow them generally except in fixed penalties and retaliation. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): There is consensus that women’s testimony is admissible in matters of property. JISHUMI (author): For matters that are neither property, a prescribed punishment, nor a defined right, Abu Hanifa accepts women's testimony while al-Shafiʿi rejects it. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Jurists agree women may testify alongside men in financial cases, with one man and two women sufficient. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Another group requires two upright men outside financial cases; al-Shafiʿi accepts one man and two women or four women in matters women ordinarily observe, such as birth, nursing, and sexual status. All reject women's testimony in criminal penalties. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن القاسم عن مالك): Another transmission from Malik permits women’s testimony in property, property agencies, and anything leading to property; Ashhab and others disagree, and the school has two positions when the testimony concerns a nonfinancial consequence. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن وهب عن مالك): One transmission from Malik allows women’s testimony only in the debt matters specified by the verse or in matters only women can observe, by necessity. QURTUBI-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد عبد الوهاب): Among jurists accepting oath-plus-witness, its use is limited by consensus to property and related rights, not bodily rights; property rights are lower because women's testimony is accepted there. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may testify; the source's school limits this to financial matters, while Abu Hanifa extends it outside fixed penalties and retaliation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The apparent wording permits one man's and two women's testimony in all debt contracts, including consideration, marriage, benefits, and intentional blood claims; excluding a contract requires evidence. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī rejects women's testimony with men outside property matters; for wills he accepts men for nonfinancial dispositions and women for financial dispositions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الحسن، الضحاك؛ عمر، عطاء، الشعبي؛ شريح؛ عمر وابنه عبد الله؛ علي): Other reported views limit women to debt, allow divorce, allow emancipation, allow one man with two women in marriage, or allow testimony in a contract, respectively. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Witnesses accompany writing for additional assurance. In financial matters, one man and two women may testify; Ibn Kathir connects this arrangement to a hadith describing women's testimony as half a man's and explaining their lesser reason and religious practice. BURSEVI (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness financial matters by consensus; women do not testify in fixed punishments or retaliation, where men are required. ALUSI-FULL (author): A man and two women suffice in testimony outside ḥudūd and qiṣāṣ according to al-Alusi's school, while al-Shāfiʿī confines it to property cases and excludes matters such as marriage. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Financial testimony requires either two men or one man and two women, as a precaution to protect rights rather than because women are intellectually or morally deficient; the second woman helps the first remember, and a woman counts as one witness. STUDYQURAN (IK, Q, R, Ṭ): The one-man-and-two-women witness provision is specific to these commercial transactions and differs from other testimony."}, {"id": "2:282/q39/p3", "position": "The two women require a man alongside them", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (يزيد بن عبد الرحمن بن أبي مالك): In legal claims, four women cannot replace two 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
