<<chunk 30, part 2 of 0..5>>
tic form shahidayn suggests witnesses who have testified repeatedly, implying probity. TABRISI (مجاهد): Mujāhid limits the two male witnesses to free, adult, Muslim men; al-Ṭabrisī rejects freedom as a condition, requiring Islam and probity instead. TABRISI (author): If two men are unavailable, the witness set is one man and two women whose outward probity and trustworthiness the parties accept; this makes justice a condition of testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Because testimony is a grave authority that makes another person liable, God requires approved and upright witnesses with distinguishing qualities. QURTUBI-FULL (جمهور): The majority infer that probity is an additional qualification beyond being Muslim, since the verse requires witnesses whom people approve. QURTUBI-FULL (شريح وعثمان البتى وأبو ثور): Shurayḥ, ʿUthmān al-Battī, and Abū Thawr count Muslims as upright witnesses even if enslaved. QURTUBI-FULL (علماؤنا): Probity means religious steadiness: avoiding major sins, preserving respectable conduct and avoiding minor sins, while appearing trustworthy and alert; another definition stresses apparent integrity. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Upright witnesses are even more important for marriage than debt, given its effects on lawful status, punishment, and lineage; al-Qurṭubī rejects Abū Ḥanīfa's view. | mentions 2:204, 63:4 QURTUBI-FULL (author): Apparent profession of Islam does not establish probity, since impressive speech or appearance may conceal disqualifying conduct. | mentions 2:204, 63:4 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Witnesses must be people whose uprightness is known; one woman may remind the other if she forgets, with reminder the real rationale and forgetting its trigger. NASAFI-FULL (author): The witnesses should be people whose uprightness is known; this implies some witnesses are not approved. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس، الشعبي، الحسن، النخعي، الخصاف): They define approved witnesses as people of merit, religion, and competence; untainted in sex or lineage; not known for misconduct or suspicion; or with good deeds outweighing bad deeds while avoiding major sins. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن أبي ليلى، أبو حنيفة، أبو يوسف، محمد): They accept upright witnesses from sectarian groups except the Khaṭṭābiyya among the Rāfiḍa; Muḥammad rejects Kharijites but accepts Ḥarūriyya because he distinguishes their treatment of Muslims' property. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The condition that witnesses be approved implies their probity; al-Shafi'i uses it to specify other unqualified Qur'anic witness commands, and some use it to reject unknown-status witnesses. BIQAI-FULL (author): The two women must be among those whose uprightness is approved; testimony is penetrating perception of hidden meaning through an apparent form. BURSEVI (author): The requirement that witnesses be approved applies to both the man and the women; women are included by grammatical predominance, and the phrase points to trust and known integrity. ELMALILI (author): Witness competence requires sound retention; witnesses lacking moral probity or reliable acquisition or retention of evidence are not admissible. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Here al-ʿadl means the right or truth, not the moral probity required of a witness, because the preposition bi rules out that sense. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): Sadd means a barrier or protection; sadad shifts to uprightness and sound guidance in speech, action, and affairs, while adl usually concerns judgments and opposes injustice."}, {"id": "2:282/q41/p2", "position": "Approved witnesses must have reliable, upright character.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says the witness formula concerns debts and that approved witnesses are just. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Children are not acceptable witnesses because they are not among those whose testimony is approved. JISHUMI (إبراهيم): Ibrāhīm defines an acceptable witness as someone who has not shown cause for suspicion. JISHUMI (author): The command identifies witnesses, their number, method, and qualifications, and indicates a duty to establish testimony. JISHUMI (author): A witness should meet ten qualities: freedom, adulthood, Islam, integrity, knowledge of the testimony, no self-interest or self-protection, few errors, manly virtue, alertness, and not being heedless. TABRISI (author): The wording requires witnesses acceptable to the parties, since people cannot know whom God approves except from outward reliability and integrity. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas says witnesses “whom you approve” are people of merit and religious integrity. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي وأبو حنيفة وأصحابه): They reject children's testimony because children lack the qualifications of men, approved witnesses, and just adults named elsewhere in scripture. | mentions 5:95 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن بكير): Ibn Bukayr and others take the address requiring approved witnesses to be directed to judges. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The requirement of witness approval supports inference from signs and entrusts judges with discretion to detect carelessness or suspicion and reject testimony. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Seek two witnesses” is a request for testimony or equivalent to “make two witnesses”; shahīd is intensive, suggesting experienced witnesses whose repeated use indicates acceptance and integrity. BURHAN (author): The author’s preferred reading takes شهيدين as two witnesses of either sex, then qualifies them as men; the pronoun returns to the unqualified pair, so the condition negates their being men and fits the fallback. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Acceptable witnesses are two just, free Muslims. ITQAN (author): One explanation takes the dual phrase as covering two or more by naming the minimum; the better analysis makes the pronoun refer back to the two witnesses already mentioned without qualification. ELMALILI (author): Requiring at least two witnesses removes suspicion and the possibility of error or forgetfulness, displaying the strength of their retention and justice. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The verse names one scribe and two witnesses because people who are both literate and qualified to witness are uncommon. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author objects to making testimony depend on each witness’s own varying judgments about these conditions, calling that a door to excessive legal qualification. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حنيفة): The author applies the earlier disagreement about scribes: accepting the request to bear witness becomes individual when designated, and giving testimony is individually obligatory if it causes no bodily or financial harm; Abū Ḥanīfa makes performance communal unless uniquely required, subject to court integrity, proximity, admissibility, and a claimant’s request. IBNASHUR-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet had a sale witnessed and wrote a document for al-ʿAdāʾ ibn Khālid describing the purchased slave as free of defects and prohibited liabilities. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): Qur'anic contexts use adl for equality, compensation, and justice in judgment, arbitration, and testimony, supporting its broad semantic range and frequent legal use. | mentions 6:1, 6:150, 4:3, 4:129, 4:135, 2:48, 2:123, 6:70, 5:95, 5:106, 65:2, 4:58, 49:9, 5:8, 6:115, 6:152"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q42", "question": "Whom does ممن ترضون describe or address?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q42/p1", "position": "The approval qualification governs the witnesses.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says God commands two just men, or, if unavailable, one man and two approved women. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي وأبو حنيفة وأصحابه): They reject children's testimony because children lack the qualifications of men, approved witnesses, and just adults named elsewhere in scripture. | mentions 5:95 SAMIN-DURR (الشيخ): The Sheikh attaches ممن ترضون directly to استشهدوا so the qualification applies to every witness; its late position signals this scope. SAMIN-DURR (author): من الشهداء may be a circumstantial of the omitted relative pronoun in ممن ترضون, or apposition to its من with a repeated preposition. BURSEVI (author): The requirement that witnesses be approved applies to both the man and the women; women are included by grammatical predominance, and the phrase points to trust and known integrity."}, {"id": "2:282/q42/p2", "position": "The address is to all contracting believers", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Grammatically, ‘among those whom you approve’ modifies ‘a man and two women’; Abu Ali excludes ‘two witnesses’ from the adjective because its case differs, but the author says approval applies in meaning to both witness arrangements. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن بكير وغيره): They take ‘among those whom you approve’ as an address to judges; the author says the address is to everyone, although judges handle the actual case. RAZI-FULL (author): The qualification ممن ترضون and the parallel divorce instruction show that not everyone may testify; jurists enumerate ten conditions, including freedom, adulthood, Islam, justice, knowledge, and lack of personal conflict or benefit. | mentions 65:2 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya rejects limiting the address to judges: it addresses everyone, although judges carry out the case in practice. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Among witnesses whom you approve” most likely modifies “seek witnesses,” applying approval to all combinations; adjective and substitution analyses are weak."}, {"id": "2:282/q42/p3", "position": "The phrase modifies the man and two women", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA (author): ممن ترضون describes the nominative رجل وامرأتان, not the earlier accusative شهيدين; the case mismatch rules out the earlier noun phrase as its antecedent. TABRISI (author): For Ḥamza's conditional reading, رجل وامرأتان forms a nominative description of the two women, while ممن ترضون refers back to that nominative pair rather than accusative شهيدين. SAMIN-DURR (author): ممن ترضون may be a nominative adjective of رجل وامرأتا
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
