<<chunk 30, part 1 of 0..5>>
men; women’s testimony requires a man alongside them, and one man and one woman do not suffice. FARISI-HUJJA (author): On either analysis, the phrase means that testimony by one man and two women should occur, not that the man and women themselves should occur; the noun testimony is omitted and its complement stands for it. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The verse permits two women’s testimony only when paired with a man. TABRISI (author): If two men are unavailable, the witness set is one man and two women whose outward probity and trustworthiness the parties accept; this makes justice a condition of testimony. NASAFI-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; male testimony with women is accepted outside fixed punishments and retaliation. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The witnesses should be two free Muslim men or one man and two women; one woman may forget and the other remind her, and witnesses who hold testimony must respond when called. ALUSI-FULL (author): If two men are not sought, the alternatives can be parsed elliptically as one man and two women testifying, serving as witnesses, or being requested as witnesses. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The condition means that if two men are not present at the transaction, one man and two women may testify; the answer clause is elliptical, understood from the command to obtain witnesses."}, {"id": "2:282/q39/p4", "position": "Women alone may testify in matters men cannot observe", "reasons": "THALABI (author): Women may testify without men in four matters: women's bodily defects, nursing, childbirth, and the first cry after birth; bodily evidence is limited to the specified private areas. JISHUMI (author): Women alone may testify in matters men cannot observe, such as female defects, childbirth, and the newborn's first cry; jurists disagree about nursing. JISHUMI (أبو حنيفة): In fields where women's testimony alone is accepted, Abu Hanifa accepts one woman, while Muhammad requires four. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Women may testify alone in matters that no one else can observe, out of necessity. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Mālik's school accepts two women's testimony in matters unavailable to other witnesses, such as childbirth and a newborn's first cry, though details are disputed. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): There is no disagreement that women may testify alone about childbirth, virginity, a newborn's first cry, women's defects, and comparable matters specific to women. ALUSI-FULL (مالك): Mālik excludes such testimony from ḥudūd, qiṣāṣ, clientage, and proof of chastity, but accepts it for agency and wills where emancipation is not involved; women alone may testify in matters such as birth or virginity."}, {"id": "2:282/q39/p5", "position": "Their testimony with men extends beyond finance except penalties and retaliation", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; Abū Ḥanīfa accepts women’s testimony with men except in ḥudūd and retaliation. STUDYQURAN (Q): Classical law generally excluded women’s testimony in corporal punishment and qiṣāṣ cases, though this appears to be preference because women could testify without a male witness. | mentions 2:178 STUDYQURAN (author): Because women of the time generally lacked experience with complex finance, two women could make testimony more practical and protect them from bullying or manipulation, rather than indicting their reliability."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q40", "question": "Can a claim be proved by one witness and an oath?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q40/p1", "position": "A claim can be established by one witness and an oath", "reasons": "JISHUMI (أبو علي وأكثر الفقهاء): Abu ʿAli and most jurists infer that judgment cannot rest on one witness plus an oath because that exceeds the divinely set limit; Abu Hashim and al-Shafiʿi permit it. RAZI-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shafiʿi permits judgment on one witness plus the claimant’s oath, citing the Prophet’s practice; Abu Hanifa rejects it because the verse specifies two men or one man and two women. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): He accepts the pledgee's sworn account only up to the collateral's value, treating the pledge and oath as supporting him; al-Qurṭubī says the verse instead favors the debtor, and collateral value need not match the debt. QURTUBI-FULL (الثوري والأوزاعي وعطاء والحكم بن عتيبة وطائفة): They oppose judgment by an oath with a witness; some call that practice abrogated by the Quran, and ʿAṭāʾ alleges ʿAbd al-Malik first ruled that way while al-Ḥakam attributes it to Muʿāwiya. QURTUBI-FULL (مالك): He argues that when a defendant denies a claim and refuses the oath, the claimant may swear and establish it; because this accepted procedure is absent from the Quran's witness list, its existence proves the list is not exhaustive and supports the oath with one witness. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Qurṭubī rebukes those who reject judgment by an oath and one witness despite sound reports and early authorities' practice. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): The Prophet ruled by an oath together with one witness; ʿAmr ibn Dīnār restricts the report to property cases. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Qurṭubī endorses the majority position allowing an oath with one witness, based on transmitted reports and generations of Medinan practice; Mālik allowed it in every region. QURTUBI-FULL (أبو داود): A report of Ibn ʿAbbās transmitted by Abū Dāwūd expressly says the Prophet judged by one witness and an oath in rights cases. QURTUBI-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد عبد الوهاب): Among jurists accepting oath-plus-witness, its use is limited by consensus to property and related rights, not bodily rights; property rights are lower because women's testimony is accepted there. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The verse's apparent rules require two men or one man and two women, and thus do not allow judgment on one witness plus an oath; the Ḥanafīs and others agree. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (مالك، الشافعي، أحمد، إسحاق، أبو عبيد): They permit one witness plus an oath in financial claims, citing the four caliphs and Medinan practice; reports from al-Zuhrī differ on whether this was innovation and when it began."}, {"id": "2:282/q40/p2", "position": "One witness and an oath are disputed as proof in property cases.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Qurṭubī calls those accusations mistaken: the verse does not negate the Prophet's ruling by an oath and one witness, and an exclusive reading would also invalidate claims proved when a defendant refuses to swear, contrary to consensus. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Although one might call the oath-and-witness ruling case-specific, al-Qurṭubī reads it as establishing a general legal rule. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Since the debtor is trusted to dictate, a pledgor's sworn account of the debt prevails while the collateral remains; most jurists and Ibn al-Mundhir agree because the creditor claims the excess, in keeping with the rule that the claimant bears proof and the defendant swears. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Other reports condemn witnesses who testify before being asked, whose oaths and testimony precede each other, or who testify without a request; these are false witnesses."}, {"id": "2:282/q40/p3", "position": "One witness and an oath do not suffice", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (الزهري): One report from al-Zuhrī calls judgment by oath and witness an innovation and insists on two witnesses; another says he first ruled by it. QURTUBI-FULL (المازري): Al-Māzarī reports agreement on oath-plus-witness for pure money claims and rejection for marriage or divorce as such; claims leading only to money are disputed."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q41", "question": "What makes witnesses acceptable?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q41/p1", "position": "Known probity beyond apparent Islam is required", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): If two men cannot be found, the clause permits a man and two women; several nominative and accusative parses are grammatically possible. Approved witnesses are upright in religion and character. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): The witnesses must be men of probity. IBNABIHATIM (إبراهيم): Acceptable witnesses are those not known to have a defect. THALABI (إبراهيم النخعي): Ibrahim al-Nakhaʿi defines uprightness as having no apparent cause for suspicion. THALABI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi defines an upright witness as one not accused of sexual or financial misconduct. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan defines uprightness as having no known disgrace. THALABI (author): An acceptable witness must meet ten conditions: freedom, adulthood, Islam, uprightness, knowledge of the matter, no personal gain or avoidance of harm, few errors, proper social conduct, no excessive leniency, and no adverse testimony from his slave. MAWARDI-FULL (الجمهور): Acceptable witnesses are free, Muslim, upright people. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The source lists ten qualities for an admissible witness: freedom, adulthood, Islam, uprightness, knowledge, no self-serving interest or self-protective motive, no frequent error, no breach of propriety, and no enmity with the party testified against. JISHUMI (author): Acceptable witnesses are upright in religion, trustworthy, and competent; another gloss requires that no suspicion or accusation attach to them. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): A witness must be approved in religion and trustworthiness; seven qualifications are Islam, freedom, sound mind, adulthood, uprightness, social propriety, and absence of suspicion. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Uprightness means avoiding major sins and not persisting in minor ones. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Acceptable witnesses are those whose uprightness is known. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Following Sībawayh, aqsaṭ and aqwam may derive regularly from verbs or by analogy from qāsiṭ and qayyim, meaning possessed of justice and uprightness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The empha
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
