<<chunk 30, part 5 of 0..5>>
 already noted in the two-kasra discussion. NASHR (author): For the fifth class, early authorities mostly replace the softened second hamza with a pure kasra waw; later authorities mostly use a between-between sound. Al-Dani says the latter is better by analogy, the former stronger in transmission. NASHR (حمزة): Ḥamza reads the hamza in أن تضل with kasra. ALUSI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads an tadilla as a conditional clause and فتذكر in the indicative; its syntax is discussed in the next segment. ELMALILI (author): The verse's readings differ on the forms of an tadilla and fa-tudhakkira; Hamza reads with the hamza's kasra, while Ibn Kathir, Abu Amr, and Yaqub use a still zā and an ungeminated kāf. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ḥamza reads in tadhilla with kasra as a conditional, and raises tadhakkiru as the predicate of an omitted subject after fa; the author compares this syntax with Qur’an 5:95. | mentions 5:95"}, {"id": "2:282/q46/p2", "position": "Open أن gives a purpose clause with subjunctive verbs", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In ‘أن تضل إحداهما,’ the preposition is omitted; the clause is treated like a verbal noun, as if it said ‘لأن تضل إحداهما.’ TAB-FULL (author): Most Hijaz, Medina, and some Iraqi reciters read “an taḍilla” with open أن and subjunctive verbs, meaning the second woman reminds the first if she errs; the wording places the reminder after the error for its intended sense. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers the widely transmitted open-أن reading with a doubled kāf and subjunctive verbs: one woman reminds the other if she errs; فتذكر is coordinated with تضل and أن stands where كي would. IBNMUJAHID (حمزة): Hamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra and فتذكر with doubled kāf and indicative ending; the others use open أن and a subjunctive verb, except Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr, who lighten the verb. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): Kasra in إن تضل makes a conditional clause with a jussive verb; fatḥa in أن تضل treats it as a complement after an understood li, meaning lest one err. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Hamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra and فتذكر geminated in the nominative; the others open أن and use accusative فتذكر, with Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr lightening its kāf. FARISI-HUJJA (أبو الحسن): Abu al-Hasan supplies فليكن رجل وامرأتان; Abu Ali calls this a good analysis because it gives أن تضل an implied verb that raises the indefinite and governs the clause. FARISI-HUJJA (author): A third attachment is possible: أن تضل may depend on the predicate of an implied nominal clause, in addition to the implied command to witness or the verb فليشهد. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Under Hamza's conditional reading, the clause and response describe the two women; the lām in لأن تضل is jussive, opened to resolve adjacent sukūns, though kasra is also analogically possible. | mentions 22:41 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The purpose clause an taḍilla attaches to an implied command to seek one man and two women; it may attach to an implicit verb or to a supplied predicate. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Because the clause also says fatudhakkira, the interpretation of an taḍilla as the stated purpose fails: fear of forgetting makes sense, but fear of reminding does not. WAHIDI-BASIT (حمزة): Ḥamza reads in taḍilla with kasra and fatudhakkira in the indicative; inna is conditional, taḍilla is jussive with a joining fatḥa, and the fāʾ introduces the apodosis. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Readings have fatadhakkara light or doubled, fatadhākarā, and Hamza’s conditional in tidilla with indicative fatadhakkaru. IBNATIYYA-FULL (حمزة): Hamza alone reads inna tadilla with kasra on inna and fatḥa then kasra on the verb, and fataḏakkara with fatḥa on the ذ and nominative rāʾ; al-Aʿmash shares this reading. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الباقون): The other readers use an open an in an taḍilla and make fataḏakkara accusative; Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr lighten its ذ and ك, while the others geminate them. RAZI-FULL (سائر القراء): Other readers use accusative أن, parsed either as لأن تضل with an elided preposition or as a purpose clause. QURTUBI-FULL (سيبويه): Under Ḥamza's conditional reading, Sībawayh parses the following verb as a new clause; with the open particle it is an object of purpose with an omitted governor. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): With open an, the clause is a purpose-cause: the possibility of forgetting is expressed as the reason for the other to remind, carried by meaning like preparing a prop for a wall that may lean. SAMIN-DURR (author): Two economical estimates are رجل وامرأتان يشهدون لأن تضل or فليشهد رجل; each supplies the needed predicate or verb. SAMIN-DURR (أبو جعفر): Abu Ja'far reports that al-Abbas estimated كراهة أن تضل; Abu Ja'far calls it mistaken because it makes the desired reminder something disliked. SAMIN-DURR (author): Nominative فتذكر is coordinated to أن تضل in the readings with أن; only Hamza raises the rāʾ, and the readers divide into three combinations of إن/أن, light/doubled kāf, and case. SAMIN-DURR (author): With أن, the verb is subjunctive and the lām of purpose is omitted: لأن تضل or إرادة أن تضل; its fatha differs from the junction fatha in Hamza's jussive reading. BURHAN (الكوفيون): The Kufans explain an before a future verb as لئلا, “lest,” in examples such as أن تضل إحداهما فتذكر. NASHR (الباقون): The other readers read the hamza in أن تضل with fatḥa. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): A text opens a relationship with truth rather than stating a final truth; readers in each era give it contemporary language and fill it with meaning according to general purposes."}, {"id": "2:282/q46/p3", "position": "The readings differ between a purpose clause and a condition.", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): أن تضل إحداهما means that one of the two forgets. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أن تضل means that one woman forgets the testimony and the other reminds her; Moses' phrase uses ضالّ for forgetful. | mentions 26:20 FARISI-HUJJA (author): أن تضل cannot attach directly to استشهدوا شهيدين; the following alternative of one man and two women signals an omitted command to call those witnesses. SAMIN-DURR (الجرجاني): Al-Jurjani estimates مخافة أن تضل and cites Amr's verse; the author says this works alone, but فتذكر makes it mistakenly mean fearing that she reminds."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
