<<chunk 30, part 4 of 0..5>>
e first remember, and a woman counts as one witness."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q45", "question": "What does تضل mean here?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q45/p1", "position": "A woman forgets part of her testimony", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): أن تضل إحداهما means that one of the two forgets. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أن تضل means that one woman forgets the testimony and the other reminds her; Moses' phrase uses ضالّ for forgetful. | mentions 26:20 IBNQUTAYBA-MUSHKIL (author): Ḍalāl can mean forgetting: the forgetful person turns away from a matter and its recollection. TAB-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash reads إن with kasra, puts تضل in the conditional jussive, and raises فتذكر as its response, yielding an independent statement about one witness reminding the other if she forgets. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects Ibn ʿUyaynah's “making her male” interpretation: it contradicts the exegetes and misunderstands error in testimony as forgetfulness, when the forgetful witness needs reminding. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The woman’s error means that she forgets her testimony. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Since Abu Ubayda glosses ضلال as forgetting, the natural opposite in context is remembering or reminding; this supports the ordinary reading of the clause. BAQILLANI (author): Reports of codex differences do not prove denial: a memorizer might err or forget a few letters, but the author rejects a broader claim against Ibn Masʿud. THALABI (author): Here tadilla means to forget, as in verses that pair ضلال with not knowing or forgetting and describe losing something in the earth. | mentions 20:52, 26:20, 32:10 MAWARDI-FULL (author): The woman may err or forget; Sibawayh identifies forgetting as one meaning. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس وجميع أهل التفسير والمعاني): Ibn ʿAbbās and exegetes and language scholars take taḍilla as forget, since the forgetful turns away from recall; 26:20 and al-Farazdaq’s verse illustrate it, while Abū ʿAmr says the root means disappearance. | mentions 26:20 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Because the clause also says fatudhakkira, the interpretation of an taḍilla as the stated purpose fails: fear of forgetting makes sense, but fear of reminding does not. DAMGHANI (author): Ḍalāl can mean forgetting; one of the two women may forget. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The purpose clause does not mean that testimony is taken in order for a woman to err; two women are appointed so one can remind the other if she forgets. Sibawayh compares this construction to preparing a prop for a wall if it leans. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd glosses taḍilla as ‘forget’; the author says a witness’s error is forgetting part and remembering part, whereas total forgetfulness is not called straying from testimony. TABRISI (الربيع والسدي والضحاك وأكثر المفسرين): Most commentators take تضل as one woman forgetting the testimony she and the other woman heard; the light reading likewise means prompting her to recall it. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): A Qur'anic use of ضل is forgetting, as in the case of one witness needing the other to remind her. RAZI-FULL (author): Ḍalāl in the clause can mean forgetting, as in the verse about what vanished from people, or failing to find one’s way; Abu ʿAmr says its root sense is disappearance. NASAFI-FULL (author): Writing a deferred debt is recommended because it better guards against forgetfulness and denial. SAMIN-DURR (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو): They lighten the kāf and read فتذكر with accusative rāʾ from أذكرته, meaning to make someone recall after forgetting; ضلال means forgetting, supported by 26:20 and al-Farazdaq. | mentions 26:20 BURHAN (author): The two women serve to ensure reminder, not to cause error; since forgetting triggers the other’s reminder, the cause is put in place of the intended outcome. BURHAN (سيبويه والبصريون): For this verse, neither “lest one err” nor “for fear of error” makes error a sensible purpose of testimony; the intended purpose is reminder if one forgets, with error as its trigger, like preparing a prop to support a wall if it leans. ALUSI-FULL (سعيد بن جبير والضحاك والربيع والسدي): These early authorities are reported as using ضل for a person who forgets, supporting the ordinary reading of the verse. ELMALILI (author): Requiring at least two witnesses removes suspicion and the possibility of error or forgetfulness, displaying the strength of their retention and justice. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The two women provide a safeguard against confusion or forgetting, which the author describes as more common among women by ordinary disposition; ḍalāl here means forgetfulness. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو القاسم المغربي): Abū al-Qāsim al-Maghribī reads the first one as one of the two testimonies and takes ḍalāl as loss through forgetting, then assigns the second one to a woman. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Because ordinary borrowing is necessary and abuse led to usury, the Qur'an permits loans and other lawful deferred contracts after forbidding interest; writing, witnesses, collateral, and trust help ensure timely full repayment and prevent forgetting or denial. STUDYQURAN (Q, R, Ṭ): To err means to forget an aspect of the contract."}, {"id": "2:282/q45/p2", "position": "Ḍalāl here means forgetting or losing track of testimony.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Most Hijaz, Medina, and some Iraqi reciters read “an taḍilla” with open أن and subjunctive verbs, meaning the second woman reminds the first if she errs; the wording places the reminder after the error for its intended sense. FARISI-HUJJA (author): In 20:52, لا يضل ربي means the book does not go astray from my Lord. Here أن is accusative and attaches to one of the previously proposed implied verbs. | mentions 20:52 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The purpose clause an taḍilla attaches to an implied command to seek one man and two women; it may attach to an implicit verb or to a supplied predicate. WAHIDI-BASIT (حمزة): Ḥamza reads in taḍilla with kasra and fatudhakkira in the indicative; inna is conditional, taḍilla is jussive with a joining fatḥa, and the fāʾ introduces the apodosis. JISHUMI (author): Ḍalāl originally means destruction; Arabic says water was lost in milk, and the Qurʾan also uses it for the criminals' ruin. | mentions 54:47 JISHUMI (author): Another proposed root sense of ḍalāl is going away so completely that one cannot be found, as in the question about being lost in the earth. | mentions 32:10 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الباقون): The other readers use an open an in an taḍilla and make fataḏakkara accusative; Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr lighten its ذ and ك, while the others geminate them. TABRISI (author): Ḍalāl originally means loss or going where something cannot be found; saʾam is weariness, and أقسط means acted justly while قسط means acted unjustly. | mentions 54:47 BAYDAWI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads an taḍilla conditionally, with fa-tudhakkira in the indicative."}, {"id": "2:282/q45/p3", "position": "The testimony itself is lost", "reasons": "TABRISI (حسين بن علي المغربي): Al-Maghribī says تضل concerns a lost or forgotten testimony, not a woman herself going astray; this avoids needless repetition of إحداهما. | mentions 7:37"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q46", "question": "How is إن or أن تضل read?", "turns_on": "The vowel of إن or أن and the case of the following verbs.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q46/p1", "position": "Kasra إن gives a conditional clause", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash reads إن with kasra, puts تضل in the conditional jussive, and raises فتذكر as its response, yielding an independent statement about one witness reminding the other if she forgets. ZAJJAJ (author): With kasra on إن, the clause is conditional: if one forgets, the remembering woman reminds her; فتذكر is indicative in this reading. THALABI (الأعمش وحمزة): Al-Aʿmash and Hamza read إن with kasra and فتذكر in the nominative, construing the clause conditionally or as a new beginning. JISHUMI (حمزة): Ḥamza reads the hamza of إن with kasra and فتذكر with indicative mood and shadda; he construes the phrase conditionally and as a new clause after the conditional fa. BAGHAWI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads in tadhilla with kasra and fa-tadhakkara in the nominative, construing the phrase as a conditional continuation; the following verb is resumed after the conditional fa. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): For Hamza’s reading, an is conditional and the fa-clause is its answer; Sibawayh treats the raised verb as an adjective of the two women, though the author has reservations. The majority accusative coordinates with the verb governed by an. TABRISI (حمزة): Ḥamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra, as a conditional particle whose جواب is فتذكر. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Hamza reads in tadhilla with kasra; here dalāl means forgetfulness, according to Ibn ʿAbbas, al-Dahhak, al-Suddi, al-Rabiʿ, Muqatil, and others. RAZI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads إن with kasra and فتذكر as a raised, doubled form, taking the construction as conditional; the jussive of تضل is obscured by its doubled consonant. QURTUBI-FULL (حمزة): Ḥamza reads the particle with kasra as a conditional; the following clause answers it and the phrase describes the witnesses. | mentions 5:95 BAYDAWI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads an taḍilla conditionally, with fa-tudhakkira in the indicative. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأعمش، حمزة): They read in tadhilla with a kasra as a conditional particle and fa-tudhakkiru with doubled dhāl and a jussive response. SAMIN-DURR (author): Hamza reads إن تضل as a conditional particle; others read أن تضل as an accusative verbal noun, with a causal lām understood. SAMIN-DURR (حمزة): Hamza reads فتذكر with doubled kāf and nominative rāʾ as the conditional answer, understood as فهي تذكر. NASHR (author): Within the two-kasra class, three loci are disputed: للنبي إن أراد and بيوت النبي except in Nafi’s reading, and من الشهداء أن تضل in Hamza’s reading. NASHR (author): The differing-hamza class has one locus, من الشهداء أن, except for Hamza’s reading, as
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
