<<chunk 31, part 2 of 0..5>>
eads إن with kasra, puts تضل in the conditional jussive, and raises فتذكر as its response, yielding an independent statement about one witness reminding the other if she forgets. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ explains that one woman may forget and the other reminds her. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says one woman may forget the testimony and the other reminds her. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk likewise interprets the clause as one woman forgetting and the other reminding her. ZAJJAJ (بعض أهل اللغة): For the majority’s open أن reading, some grammarians posit a condition moved forward: appoint two women so the remembering one can remind the forgetful one. ZAJJAJ (سيبويه والخليل وجميع النحويين الموثوق بعلمهم): The reliable grammarians take أن as purpose: appoint two women so one can remind the other; forgetting is mentioned because it causes the reminder. IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): The other woman reminds her companion of the testimony. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The reminding woman is the one who retained her testimony. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The testimony is called so one woman may forget and the other remind her; as Sibawayh explains, forgetting is the cause that makes reminding necessary, not the intended outcome. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The second object of فتذكر إحداهما الأخرى is omitted; the meaning is that one woman reminds the other of the testimony they undertook. FARISI-HUJJA (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn Uyayna interprets the phrase as one woman making the other a reminder, but Abu Ali judges this weak because women still need a man for a valid testimony. THALABI (author): The common reading has إن with fatḥa and فتذكر accusative, linked to the preceding clause through an understood causal preposition: one woman may err so the other reminds her. THALABI (author): The author rejects that reading of the rationale because the reminder is conjoined to forgetting, not to male remembrance. MAWARDI-FULL (قتادة والسدي والضحاك وابن زيد): One woman reminds the other if she forgets. WAHIDI-BASIT (عامة المفسرين): Most exegetes understand the other woman to remind her after she forgets. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عمرو بن العلاء): Abū ʿAmr distinguishes the readings: geminated means reminding after forgetting; light means one woman reminds the other because the two together stand in a man’s place. WAHIDI-BASIT (المفسرون): Exegetes reject the male-equivalence interpretation: women without a man still cannot testify, forgetting should be paired with its opposite, remembering, and equal male status would apply across all legal rulings. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses are two free adult men of the believers, acceptable for their merit and religion; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her of the testimony. JISHUMI (الربيع والسدي والضحاك وابن زيد): Al-Rabīʿ, al-Suddī, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, Ibn Zayd, and most exegetes take ‘go astray’ as forget, so one woman reminds the other of the testimony. JISHUMI (author): Jishumi rejects the ‘make her like a man’ gloss because the preceding condition that one may err indicates that reminder means recalling the testimony. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The majority read an tadhilla in the subjunctive, coordinated with fa-tadhakkara, meaning one woman may forget her testimony and the other remind her of the hearing. BAGHAWI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): He interprets the wording as making one woman the equivalent of a male witness, but the author prefers the reminder interpretation because it is coordinated with forgetting. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The purpose clause does not mean that testimony is taken in order for a woman to err; two women are appointed so one can remind the other if she forgets. Sibawayh compares this construction to preparing a prop for a wall if it leans. TABRISI (author): The particle أن is accusative here, with the sense “because one woman may forget, then the other remind her.” TABRISI (سيبويه): Sībawayh says testimony is requested so one woman may remind the other; possible forgetfulness is the reason for reminding, like shoring a wall because it may lean. RAZI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyan ibn ʿUyayna interprets the second woman as making the first a male-equivalent witness, rather than reminding her of forgotten testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة وأبو عمرو بن العلاء): Ibn ʿUyayna and Abū ʿAmr understand the lighter reading of the reminder verb as returning a woman's testimony to memory, so two women's testimony totals a man's. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Qurṭubī finds the lighter reminder reading less apt: a reminder naturally answers forgetfulness, and the doubled reading means one woman alerts the other when she forgets. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Witnesses must be people whose uprightness is known; one woman may remind the other if she forgets, with reminder the real rationale and forgetting its trigger. NASAFI-FULL (author): The two-witness clause explains that one woman may forget the testimony and the other remind her; Ḥamza reads the verb with nominative and gemination under the conditional, while Makki and Baṣri read it accusatively from dhikr. SAMIN-DURR (author): Because أذكرته is causative and takes two objects, the omitted second is testimony: one woman reminds the other of her testimony after forgetting. SAMIN-DURR (الأصمعي): Al-Asma'i transmits from Abu Amr two readings of meaning: doubled فتذكر recalls after forgetting, while light فتذكر makes the second woman a reminder by joining her testimony. SAMIN-DURR (المفسرون وأهل اللسان): Exegetes and linguists reject the male-equivalence interpretation: forgetting pairs naturally with reminding, it does not fit the testimony rule's male witness, and it would imply wider legal equivalence. SAMIN-DURR (author): The repeated إحداهما rather than a pronoun preserves ambiguity because either woman may forget and remind; the generic wording means if one forgets, the other reminds. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): If one woman forgets, the other reminds her; another reading intensifies the verb. Ibn Kathir rejects the claim that having two women together makes them equivalent to a man and prefers the reminder interpretation. BURHAN (author): The two women serve to ensure reminder, not to cause error; since forgetting triggers the other’s reminder, the cause is put in place of the intended outcome. BURHAN (سيبويه والبصريون): For this verse, neither “lest one err” nor “for fear of error” makes error a sensible purpose of testimony; the intended purpose is reminder if one forgets, with error as its trigger, like preparing a prop to support a wall if it leans. BIQAI-FULL (author): One woman may lose or forget some testimony, so the other reminds her; the verse makes this the reason two women stand in place of one man. BIQAI-FULL (author): The reference to reminding implies that testimony without recall is barred; the verse also uses reciprocal omission, with one side understood from the other. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The witnesses should be two free Muslim men or one man and two women; one woman may forget and the other remind her, and witnesses who hold testimony must respond when called. DURR-FULL (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masud's reading says one woman may err and the other remind her. BURSEVI (author): One woman may forget and the other remind her; reminder is the real purpose, while possible error is named as its cause, as in preparing a weapon to repel a possible enemy. ALUSI-FULL (author): The two-woman provision explains the testimony rule: if one forgets, the other reminds her; al-Alusi attributes forgetfulness to women’s temperaments. ALUSI-FULL (author): Putting the explicit object before the subject foregrounds reminding the woman who forgot; repeating the noun also avoids assigning forgetfulness to one particular woman. ALUSI-FULL (author): Ibn Masud’s reading, transmitted by al-Aʿmash, has her remind her; other grammarians say the canonical wording intensifies ambiguity about which woman forgets. ELMALILI (author): If neither woman forgot, their evidentiary position is stronger; the mutual reminder need not happen in court, where it could prevent acceptance of testimony. ELMALILI (author): On Hamza’s reading, if one woman forgets or errs, the other reminds her. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author prefers a compound-cause account: the wording concisely expresses both avoiding loss when one woman forgets and gaining the benefit of the second woman’s reminder, better than al-Zamakhsharī’s account. IBNASHUR-FULL (التفتازاني): Al-Taftāzānī notes that the repetition is not an ordinary replacement of a pronoun because the woman who reminds is not the forgetful one, and asks for the rhetorical reason. STUDYQURAN (author): Commentators differ over whether the reminded woman becomes legally equal to a man or the two women together equal one man; the latter view was more widely accepted. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو عمرو بن العلاء وسفيان بن عيينة): They interpret the light form as making the other woman’s testimony count as a man’s testimony; the author rejects this as distant and inelegant, saying remembrance is the fitting opposite of straying and the implied object is testimony."}, {"id": "2:282/q49/p2", "position": "The two women together count like a male witness", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (سفيان بن عيينة): Sufyān ibn ʿUyayna instead interprets it as making the other woman a male witness, so their joint testimony counts as a man’s; this is also attributed to Abū ʿAmr ibn al-ʿAlāʾ and reported through a narration. RAZI-FULL (أبو عمرو بن العلاء): Abu ʿAmr ibn al-ʿAlaʾ also transmits the male-equivalent reading, explaining that the second woman’s testimony joins the first to make one man’s testimony. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): An eccentric interpretation takes فتذكر to mean making the other woman a male witness, so their joint testimony equals a man's."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q50", "question": "Why is إحداهما repeated?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q50/p1", "position": "Repetition leaves e
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
