<<chunk 31, part 3 of 0..5>>
ither woman able to forget or remind.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The repeated إحداهما may put the subject before its object and avoid separating verb and subject, or may clarify that a testimony is lost rather than a person straying. BURHAN (author): Repeating إحداهما instead of using a pronoun gives the noun greater importance and balances the two clauses; the author calls this rare structural or semantic parallelism, beyond mere sound-patterning. BURHAN (author): The repeated إحداهما may refer to the same woman or another; in 2:282, if the second is an object, definite nouns identify the same referent, while if it is subject they may match by kind. Most grammarians treat an unmarked first noun as subject, unlike al-Zajjaj’s view on دعواهم. | mentions 21:15 IBNASHUR-FULL (التفتازاني): Al-Taftāzānī notes that the repetition is not an ordinary replacement of a pronoun because the woman who reminds is not the forgetful one, and asks for the rhetorical reason. TABATABAI (author): “Lest one of them err” elliptically means fearing that one woman will err; repeating “one of them” distinguishes the initially unspecified woman from the one who reminds after the other errs."}, {"id": "2:282/q50/p2", "position": "Repetition makes either woman the possible forgetter or reminder", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): The repeated إحداهما rather than a pronoun preserves ambiguity because either woman may forget and remind; the generic wording means if one forgets, the other reminds. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa gives two reasons for repeating the apparent noun: preserve role ambiguity, or replace a pronoun whose reference would make the forgetter also the reminder. ALUSI-FULL (شهاب الدين الغزنوي): In the Khafaji anecdote, the judge answers that repeating one of them preserves ambiguity; a pronoun would wrongly identify a particular woman as the one subject to the ruling. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Repeating one of them instead of a pronoun lets either woman be subject or object without changing the meaning; an implicit pronoun would still have an unambiguous antecedent despite its different grammatical role. IBNASHUR-FULL (الخفاجي): Al-Khafājī says the repetition conveys generality: either woman may forget or remind, so neither is merely a secondary reminder rather than a witness in her own right."}, {"id": "2:282/q50/p3", "position": "The first occurrence refers to a testimony, not a woman", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (حسين بن علي المغربي): Al-Maghribi takes the first one of them as one of the two testimonies and the second as one of the two women, so one woman recalls the forgotten testimony. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو القاسم المغربي): Abū al-Qāsim al-Maghribī reads the first one as one of the two testimonies and takes ḍalāl as loss through forgetting, then assigns the second one to a woman."}, {"id": "2:282/q50/p4", "position": "Repetition makes each clause independent and emphatic", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author says repetition makes each clause stand alone like a maxim: forgetting explains why one woman is insufficient, and the second woman can keep the first woman’s testimony from failing altogether."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q51", "question": "When must summoned witnesses respond?", "turns_on": "Whether the summons is to undertake or deliver testimony.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q51/p1", "position": "The summons requires an answer from a witness when testimony is needed.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): For a debt, use two acceptable male witnesses or one man and two women; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her, and a summoned witness should serve when free. ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): Qatada says a witness must not refuse when called to give testimony. AKHFASH (author): فرجل وامرأتان means the witnesses to be summoned are one man and two women. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): The writer must not be made to record what was not dictated, nor the witness to testify without being summoned; another view says they may refuse a summons. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk includes witnesses who were formally engaged and scribes who wrote a record: when called to adjudicate a right, they must answer and report what they were entrusted with. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās also describes harm as compelling a person despite there being enough other witnesses, simply because the caller invokes the command to answer summonses. TAB-FULL (أبو سليمان المرعشي): A seller who failed to document or witness a debt and was later denied it had sinned, so his prayer against the debtor would not be answered. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says a Muslim whose testimony is needed must give it and may not refuse when summoned. ZAJJAJ (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; ‘whom you approve’ means people whose standing or judgment you approve, implying some witnesses are not acceptable. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The testimony is called so one woman may forget and the other remind her; as Sibawayh explains, forgetting is the cause that makes reminding necessary, not the intended outcome. THALABI (عامر): Amir says a witness remains free to decline until he has actually testified. THALABI (طاوس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): On the active reading, a writer must not alter the dictated record and a witness must not invent testimony or refuse to establish what he saw. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس وقتادة والربيع): Witnesses must answer a summons to have their testimony recorded in the document. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد والشعبي وعطاء): Witnesses must answer a summons to give testimony before a judge. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās glosses those whom you approve as people of virtue and religion, like the just witnesses in 65:2; this implies some witnesses should not be accepted. | mentions 65:2 WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj chooses the first interpretation because fisq suits a false witness or person who alters writing, not someone who merely summoned a busy witness; defenders of the second read fisq as sin and disobedience. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The ban on harming a scribe or witness forbids altering records, false testimony, and refusing to testify; doing so is sinful. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses are two free adult men of the believers, acceptable for their merit and religion; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her of the testimony. JISHUMI (ابن مسعود ومجاهد): Ibn Masʿud and Mujahid are associated with the fatḥa reading, meaning a witness must not be summoned while occupied in order to harm him. JISHUMI (عطاء وطاووس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): The writer must not be harmed by being forbidden to write or made to add or subtract from what was dictated; the witness must not be made to refuse or testify to what he does not know. JISHUMI (author): The passive reading means not to burden a writer or witness when called for an important need; another person should be summoned if possible. BAGHAWI-FULL (الحسن): He says a witness must answer if no substitute exists; where another is available, the witness may choose whether to do so. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): If two men are unavailable, one man and two women may witness; Abū Ḥanīfa accepts women’s testimony with men except in ḥudūd and retaliation. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Witnesses must not refuse when summoned to give testimony. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو عبيد): Abu Ubayd glosses taḍilla as ‘forget’; the author says a witness’s error is forgetting part and remembering part, whereas total forgetfulness is not called straying from testimony. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وطاوس وابن زيد): They say “do not harm a scribe or witness” prohibits a writer from adding to or subtracting from what was dictated and a witness from altering testimony; Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also understand it to prohibit their refusal. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد والضحاك والسدي وطاوس): They say a claimant harms a scribe or witness by demanding work when that person is busy or excused, then shaming him for refusing; the word's reciprocal sense encompasses these readings and the preceding ones. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If harm means falsification by a writer or witness, fisq is the legal commission of grave sins and invalidating rights; if it means mistreatment or refusal, fisq means departing from what is right, though disobeying God's command approaches the legal sense too. TABRISI (author): If two men are unavailable, the witness set is one man and two women whose outward probity and trustworthiness the parties accept; this makes justice a condition of testimony. TABRISI (author): The wording requires witnesses acceptable to the parties, since people cannot know whom God approves except from outward reliability and integrity. TABRISI (مجاهد وعطاء وسعيد بن جبير): One reported view says summoned witnesses must not refuse to give testimony they know without doubt, provided doing so causes them no harm. TABRISI (قتادة والربيع): Qatāda and al-Rabīʿ say the witnesses must not refuse when summoned to establish and carry the testimony. TABRISI (الحسن وقتادة وعطاء وابن زيد): With kasra on the first rāʾ, the prohibition addresses the writer and witness: do not change dictated terms, testify to matters not requested, or refuse to testify. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the debtor’s guardian: accepting the claimant’s dictation would leave no reason for writing and witnesses, and would simply accept the claimant’s word; Qadi Abu Yaʿla agrees. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas, Mujahid, ʿIkrima, al-Suddi, al-Rabiʿ, al-Farra, and Muqatil say a scribe or witness must not be burdened with a summons while busy; al-Rabiʿ describes a requester insisting despite an available alternative. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj argues that falsifying a document or testimony is the sort of harm called transgression in the next clause; merely summoning a busy person would not make one sinful. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عطاء): A third view from ʿAta and others says the harm is the scribe refusing to write or the witness refusing to testify. RA
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
