<<chunk 31, part 1 of 0..5>>
ve pattern; the other readers geminate it, using the intensive pattern, and both are valid. THALABI (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو ويعقوب وأبو حاتم وقتيبة): Ibn Kathir, Abu Amr, Yaqub, Abu Hatim, and Qutayba read فتذكر without doubling; the remaining readers double the consonant. THALABI (عمر وأبي وابن مسعود ومجاهد): Umar, Ubayy, Ibn Masʿud, and Mujahid read ولا يضارر with the doubled consonants made explicit, supporting the interpretation that the writer or witness is not to be harmed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Fatudhakkira is read with either gemination or a light consonant; gemination makes dhakara transitive to a second object, supported by 51:55, 88:21 and a poem, while the light form uses hamza-transitivity and omits the object, meaning the testimony. | mentions 51:55, 88:21 WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عمرو بن العلاء): Abū ʿAmr distinguishes the readings: geminated means reminding after forgetting; light means one woman reminds the other because the two together stand in a man’s place. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Readings have fatadhakkara light or doubled, fatadhākarā, and Hamza’s conditional in tidilla with indicative fatadhakkaru. TABRISI (حمزة): Ḥamza reads فتذكر with doubled dhāl and indicative mood. TABRISI (الباقون): The remaining readers read فتذكر with doubled dhāl and subjunctive mood. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Ibn Kathir and Abu ʿAmr read fatudhakkira with a light kaf and accusative ra; Hamza reads it with a doubled kaf and nominative ra; the rest use doubled kaf and accusative ra. RAZI-FULL (نافع وابن عامر وعاصم والكسائي): Nafiʿ, Ibn ʿAmir, ʿAsim, and al-Kisaʾi read فتذكر with doubling and the subjunctive; Hamza doubles it with the indicative, while Ibn Kathir and Abu ʿAmr use the lighter form. RAZI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads إن with kasra and فتذكر as a raised, doubled form, taking the construction as conditional; the jussive of تضل is obscured by its doubled consonant. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجمهور): Most readers use subjunctive an and coordinate fa-tudhakkira; Ibn Kathīr and Abū ʿAmr lighten the kāf, while others double it. SAMIN-DURR (الأصمعي): Al-Asma'i transmits from Abu Amr two readings of meaning: doubled فتذكر recalls after forgetting, while light فتذكر makes the second woman a reminder by joining her testimony. SAMIN-DURR (author): Nominative فتذكر is coordinated to أن تضل in the readings with أن; only Hamza raises the rāʾ, and the readers divide into three combinations of إن/أن, light/doubled kāf, and case. SAMIN-DURR (أبو جعفر وعمرو بن عبيد): Abu Jaʿfar and ʿAmr b. ʿUbayd read the doubled rāʾ sākin in connected speech; the author notes the three-consonant cluster is weak, tolerated by lengthening and by analogy to pause. SAMIN-DURR (author): أمل and أملى both mean dictating; some call them dialects, others derive the yāʾ as a replacement for a doubled consonant, with repetition underlying both forms. | mentions 5:54 SAMIN-DURR (حمزة): Hamza reads فتذكر with doubled kāf and nominative rāʾ as the conditional answer, understood as فهي تذكر. BURHAN (ابن مالك): Ibn Malik says the Qur’an is mostly in the Hijazi dialect, with a few Tamimi forms: assimilation is Tamimi, while preserving doubled consonants, as in فليملل and يحلل, is common in Hijaz. | mentions 59:4, 5:54, 3:31, 3:125, 4:115, 8:13, 58:5, 19:75, 20:27, 20:31 NASHR (ابن كثير والبصريان): Ibn Kathīr and the two Basran readers pronounce فتذكر without gemination. NASHR (الباقون): The other readers pronounce فتذكر with gemination. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali says the readings with light and doubled consonants distinguish women who forget once from those who repeatedly forget; either may forget different details, allowing mutual correction. DURR-FULL (الحسن): Al-Hasan recited the verb for reminding with a doubled consonant. ALUSI-FULL (author): Imlāl means dictating to a scribe; the form alternates with imlāʾ through sound changes involving the doubled consonant and final hamza. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): The doubled form يُضَارّ can be read as active or passive; spelling the consonant without assimilation would distinguish the two forms. | mentions 8:13, 5:54"}, {"id": "2:282/q48/p2", "position": "The light and doubled forms both express making someone remember.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash reads إن with kasra, puts تضل in the conditional jussive, and raises فتذكر as its response, yielding an independent statement about one witness reminding the other if she forgets. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The second object of فتذكر إحداهما الأخرى is omitted; the meaning is that one woman reminds the other of the testimony they undertook. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Because the clause also says fatudhakkira, the interpretation of an taḍilla as the stated purpose fails: fear of forgetting makes sense, but fear of reminding does not. JISHUMI (الباقون): The other readers use fatḥ on أن and read فتذكر in connection with the preceding clause, with نصب either as the object of the verb or after an understood preposition أن. TABRISI (حمزة): Ḥamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra, as a conditional particle whose جواب is فتذكر. SAMIN-DURR (الجرجاني): Al-Jurjani estimates مخافة أن تضل and cites Amr's verse; the author says this works alone, but فتذكر makes it mistakenly mean fearing that she reminds. SAMIN-DURR (بعضهم): An eccentric interpretation takes فتذكر to mean making the other woman a male witness, so their joint testimony equals a man's. BURHAN (الكوفيون): The Kufans explain an before a future verb as لئلا, “lest,” in examples such as أن تضل إحداهما فتذكر. NASHR (الباقون): The other readers read the r in فتذكر with fatḥa. ITQAN (ابن هشام): Ibn Hisham prefers the conditional analysis because both particles occur in the same syntactic position and the following فـ in فتذكر supports it. ALUSI-FULL (ابن كثير ويعقوب وأبو عمرو والحسن): These readers recite فتذكر with a still dhal and kasra on kaf."}, {"id": "2:282/q48/p3", "position": "The verb's case is indicative under a condition", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (أهل الكوفة): The Kufans read فتذكر with indicative mood. ZAJJAJ (author): With kasra on إن, the clause is conditional: if one forgets, the remembering woman reminds her; فتذكر is indicative in this reading. THALABI (الأعمش وحمزة): Al-Aʿmash and Hamza read إن with kasra and فتذكر in the nominative, construing the clause conditionally or as a new beginning. WAHIDI-BASIT (حمزة): Ḥamza reads in taḍilla with kasra and fatudhakkira in the indicative; inna is conditional, taḍilla is jussive with a joining fatḥa, and the fāʾ introduces the apodosis. JISHUMI (حمزة): Ḥamza reads the hamza of إن with kasra and فتذكر with indicative mood and shadda; he construes the phrase conditionally and as a new clause after the conditional fa. JISHUMI (author): In Ḥamza’s reading, تضل is jussive in the conditional though its doubling obscures the form; فتذكر is indicative as the clause after the conditional fa begins anew. NASHR (حمزة): Ḥamza reads the r in فتذكر in the nominative. ALUSI-FULL (حمزة): Hamza reads an tadilla as a conditional clause and فتذكر in the indicative; its syntax is discussed in the next segment."}, {"id": "2:282/q48/p4", "position": "The light form is the causative reminder verb", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة): Some readers of the light-kāf form interpret the two women's testimony together as equivalent to one man's, so each woman makes the other a “male” witness; this is reported from Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah. TAB-FULL (آخرون): Other readers of the light-kāf form take it to mean ordinary remembering after forgetfulness. JISHUMI (نافع وعاصم والكسائي وابن عامر): Nāfiʿ, ʿĀṣim, al-Kisāʾī, and Ibn ʿĀmir read فتذكر with shadda and نصب; Ḥamza uses shadda and رفع, while Ibn Kathīr and Abū ʿAmr use a light form with نصب. TABRISI (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو وقتيبة): Ibn Kathīr, Abū ʿAmr, and Qutayba read فتذكر lightly and in the subjunctive. SAMIN-DURR (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو): They lighten the kāf and read فتذكر with accusative rāʾ from أذكرته, meaning to make someone recall after forgetting; ضلال means forgetting, supported by 26:20 and al-Farazdaq. | mentions 26:20 SAMIN-DURR (حميد بن عبد الرحمن ومجاهد): They read فتذكر with light kāf and nominative rāʾ. DURR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujahid recited the same verb with a light consonant."}, {"id": "2:282/q48/p5", "position": "The verb's case is subjunctive under open أن", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In 2:282, فتذكر is subjunctive because witnessing is commanded so that one woman may remind the other; error is a cause, not the intended aim. THALABI (author): The common reading has إن with fatḥa and فتذكر accusative, linked to the preceding clause through an understood causal preposition: one woman may err so the other reminds her. BURHAN (author): The Maliki shaykh prefers not to combine different canonical readings in one verse; combining forms where one reading depends on the other, including this phrase with فتذكر in the accusative, is prohibited under the same ruling."}, {"id": "2:282/q48/p6", "position": "A mutual form means the women remind each other", "reasons": "THALABI (زيد بن أسلم): Zayd ibn Aslam reads فتذكر as mutual reminding. SAMIN-DURR (زيد بن أسلم): Zayd ibn Aslam reads فتذاكر, the reciprocal form of mutual reminding. BIQAI-FULL (author): Written debts make evidence more upright and reduce doubt; the record can also settle men's uncertainty, just as mutual reminding addresses women's lapses."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q49", "question": "Does فتذكر mean reminding or male equivalence?", "turns_on": "Whether the lighter verb means recall or male equivalence.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q49/p1", "position": "One woman reminds the other of forgotten testimony", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): For a debt, use two acceptable male witnesses or one man and two women; if one woman forgets, the other reminds her, and a summoned witness should serve when free. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أن تضل means that one woman forgets the testimony and the other reminds her; Moses' phrase uses ضالّ for forgetful. | mentions 26:20 TAB-FULL (الأعمش): Al-Aʿmash r
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
