<<chunk 31, part 5 of 0..5>>
EVI (author): Witnesses should not refuse when summoned to give or bear testimony. ELMALILI (author): A summons to bear or give testimony must not be refused: testimony is a collective duty, and becomes individually obligatory when nobody else can meet the need or particular people are required. IBNASHUR-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda, al-Rabīʿ ibn Sulaymān, and a report from Ibn ʿAbbās understand the omitted object as being called to bear witness at the transaction; refusing to bear it is forbidden all the more."}, {"id": "2:282/q51/p3", "position": "The ban concerns delivery of testimony already held", "reasons": "MUJAHID (مجاهد): The witnesses must not refuse when called if they had already witnessed the transaction. MAJAZ (author): A witness who has already testified must not refuse a summons; before witnessing, the person may choose not to testify. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ says those summoned are people who already testified; an initial invitation may be declined because witnesses are plentiful, unlike the scribe's binding duty to write. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says a witness who has testified must answer a summons to deliver and perform that testimony. TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says al-Ḥasan interpreted the verse as requiring a person who already has testimony to perform it when summoned. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid generally takes the command to concern carrying out testimony already given or held, not refusing a summons to perform it. TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid also distinguishes existing testimony, which must be performed, from a new invitation to witness, which one may accept or decline. ZAJJAJ (غير الحسن): Another view applies the command only to witnesses already holding testimony who are summoned to deliver it; those not yet witnesses may choose whether to accept an initial request. IBNABIHATIM (عامر): A person who has already witnessed must attend when summoned, but one not yet a witness may choose whether to testify; Mujahid, Saʿid, Rabiʿa, and Zayd ibn Aslam report similarly. THALABI (مجاهد وعطاء وعكرمة وسعيد بن جبير والضحاك والسدي): Mujahid and these scholars say the prohibition concerns establishing testimony already witnessed: a witness must not refuse when called to give it. BAGHAWI-FULL (مجاهد وعطاء وعكرمة وسعيد بن جبير): They understand the command as requiring witnesses to attend and deliver testimony they already accepted. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): When necessity or a real risk of losing a right arises, the recommendation approaches obligation; if delay will certainly destroy the right, testimony is obligatory, especially when it was already acquired and the summons is to deliver it, as a trust owed. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi favors testimony performance: the witnesses are already called witnesses, and the command is obligatory for all, whereas accepting testimony is not required of everyone. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي وابن أبي ليلى وأبو يوسف): They accept testimony after blindness when the witness already knew the person before losing sight, analogizing the impairment to absence or death; al-Qurṭubī sees no reason to reject testimony previously borne while sighted and accepts public knowledge for lineage. QURTUBI-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid interprets the summons as a request to give testimony already held; he and others say an initial invitation to witness may be declined. NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnesses are called witnesses before they testify because the anticipated event is treated as already actual; the first command is obligatory in principle and the second recommended. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority interprets the summons as one to give testimony already borne; a witness must answer when personally required, otherwise the duty is communal. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The witnesses who must not refuse are those who already hold testimony. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Those invited are called witnesses in anticipation: their invitation itself signals that they are already committed to accept the witnessing role."}, {"id": "2:282/q51/p4", "position": "It covers both undertaking and delivering testimony", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the prohibition covers both withholding testimony one already has and refusing to testify when summoned. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He prefers al-Hasan’s inclusive reading: the verse recommends both forms of assistance. With ample witnesses and no danger to the right, a summoned person may decline for even a slight excuse; otherwise declining without excuse earns neither sin nor reward. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya combines both readings: assistance is recommended when witnesses are plentiful, nearly obligatory in necessity, and obligatory if delay would destroy the right, especially when summoned to perform testimony already borne. BIQAI-FULL (author): Witnesses must not refuse either to bear testimony when called or to give it after bearing it; the added ma makes the summons emphatic. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس والحسن): Ibn ʿAbbas and al-Hasan are cited for interpreting the witnesses’ refusal as refusal either to give testimony or to undertake it."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
