<<chunk 31, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q47", "question": "Why is error stated before reminding?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q47/p1", "position": "Forgetting is the cause, reminder the intended result", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Mentioning possible error explains the reason for the reminder, as preparing support for a wall explains the cause without intending it to lean. SIBAWAYH (author): In 2:282, فتذكر is subjunctive because witnessing is commanded so that one woman may remind the other; error is a cause, not the intended aim. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أقسط means more just; the record strengthens testimony because it reminds witnesses of all they witnessed. ZAJJAJ (سيبويه والخليل وجميع النحويين الموثوق بعلمهم): The reliable grammarians take أن as purpose: appoint two women so one can remind the other; forgetting is mentioned because it causes the reminder. ZAJJAJ (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains that the cause of reminding is mentioned as its purpose, like preparing a beam to support a wall if it begins to lean. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The testimony is called so one woman may forget and the other remind her; as Sibawayh explains, forgetting is the cause that makes reminding necessary, not the intended outcome. THALABI (author): The author rejects that reading of the rationale because the reminder is conjoined to forgetting, not to male remembrance. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): An is accusative with a purpose sense: call two women as witnesses so that one can remind the other. WAHIDI-BASIT (سيبويه والبصريون): Sibawayh and the Basran grammarians explain that the verse names forgetting because it causes the needed reminder, as preparing a support because a wall may lean. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Because the clause also says fatudhakkira, the interpretation of an taḍilla as the stated purpose fails: fear of forgetting makes sense, but fear of reminding does not. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عمرو بن العلاء): Abū ʿAmr distinguishes the readings: geminated means reminding after forgetting; light means one woman reminds the other because the two together stand in a man’s place. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. JISHUMI (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains that straying is stated before reminding because it causes the reminder; the connected actions function as one purpose, as in propping a wall because it is leaning. JISHUMI (author): Jishumi rejects the ‘make her like a man’ gloss because the preceding condition that one may err indicates that reminder means recalling the testimony. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Writing is most equitable because God commanded it, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and most nearly prevents doubt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘Lest one err’ means fail to recall the testimony; purpose is phrased by its cause and effect, like preparing a prop for a leaning wall or a weapon for an approaching enemy. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The cause-effect construction works because the two are closely linked; intent to remind is expressed as intent that one err. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The purpose clause does not mean that testimony is taken in order for a woman to err; two women are appointed so one can remind the other if she forgets. Sibawayh compares this construction to preparing a prop for a wall if it leans. TABRISI (author): The particle أن is accusative here, with the sense “because one woman may forget, then the other remind her.” TABRISI (سيبويه): Sībawayh says testimony is requested so one woman may remind the other; possible forgetfulness is the reason for reminding, like shoring a wall because it may lean. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Witnesses must be people whose uprightness is known; one woman may remind the other if she forgets, with reminder the real rationale and forgetting its trigger. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Pairing Allah with Lord reminds the debtor that God nurtures, repairs, and favors him; Allah comes first because divine authority precedes the reminder of favors. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): With open an, the clause is a purpose-cause: the possibility of forgetting is expressed as the reason for the other to remind, carried by meaning like preparing a prop for a wall that may lean. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He agrees with al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya: the reading fails linguistically because the verb is not recorded with that causative sense, and logically because both women's testimony, not one woman's reminder, would make the equivalent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (النحاس عن علي بن سليمان عن أبي العباس): Abū al-ʿAbbās analyzes it as “for fear that one forget”; Abū Jaʿfar rejects this because it would make the purpose that the other woman remind her. SAMIN-DURR (سيبويه): Sibawayh explains that error causes reminder, so cause and result are treated as interchangeable; the purpose is that one woman remind the other, as in preparing a prop for a leaning wall. SAMIN-DURR (أبو جعفر): Abu Ja'far reports that al-Abbas estimated كراهة أن تضل; Abu Ja'far calls it mistaken because it makes the desired reminder something disliked. SAMIN-DURR (author): Because أذكرته is causative and takes two objects, the omitted second is testimony: one woman reminds the other of her testimony after forgetting. SAMIN-DURR (author): The repeated إحداهما rather than a pronoun preserves ambiguity because either woman may forget and remind; the generic wording means if one forgets, the other reminds. BURHAN (author): The two women serve to ensure reminder, not to cause error; since forgetting triggers the other’s reminder, the cause is put in place of the intended outcome. BURHAN (سيبويه والبصريون): For this verse, neither “lest one err” nor “for fear of error” makes error a sensible purpose of testimony; the intended purpose is reminder if one forgets, with error as its trigger, like preparing a prop to support a wall if it leans. BIQAI-FULL (author): The future term creates risk of forgetting, which explains the emphasis on writing; hand-to-hand trade is exempt because it is immediately exchanged and unlikely to be disputed. BURSEVI (author): One woman may forget and the other remind her; reminder is the real purpose, while possible error is named as its cause, as in preparing a weapon to repel a possible enemy. ALUSI-FULL (السيوطي): Al-Suyuti treats Salim as one of Abu Bakr's commissioned collectors, but Alusi calls this an error because Salim died at Yamama, before Abu Bakr ordered the collection. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Although the wording appears to make forgetting the cause, the practical aim is preventing loss of the testimony; remembering is the consequence that completes the causal explanation. | mentions 2:266 IBNASHUR-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī explains the wording as stressing reminder so strongly that the sentence names its enabling cause, comparing prepared timber to brace a leaning wall and weapons to repel an enemy. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author prefers a compound-cause account: the wording concisely expresses both avoiding loss when one woman forgets and gaining the benefit of the second woman’s reminder, better than al-Zamakhsharī’s account. IBNASHUR-FULL (التفتازاني): Al-Taftāzānī notes that the repetition is not an ordinary replacement of a pronoun because the woman who reminds is not the forgetful one, and asks for the rhetorical reason."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q48", "question": "How is فتذكر read and derived?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q48/p1", "position": "The doubled form is an intensive reminder verb", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Nouns longer than three letters follow doubled-consonant rules of four-letter verbs: shift a vowel onto a preceding quiescent consonant, retain an existing vowel, and leave preceding alif unchanged; afʿal forms assimilate too. SIBAWAYH (author): A dual nūn can drop and therefore differs from the inseparable doubled consonant after alif; separated doubled consonants do not undergo the same alteration. SIBAWAYH (author): A doubled verb has two identical consonants at its end, as in رددت and وددت; this is the morphological class of the verse's مضارّ form. SIBAWAYH (أهل الحجاز): The Hijaz dialect keeps the doubled consonants separate when the verb ending is quiescent, moving the preceding consonant to avoid two sukūns together. SIBAWAYH (author): If the consonant before the first of the doubled pair is quiescent, it takes that consonant’s vowel; a now-unneeded alif of connection is deleted. SIBAWAYH (author): With an alif before the doubled consonants and no alif of connection, the form remains unchanged; لا تضار is one of Sibawayh’s examples. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī prefers the widely transmitted open-أن reading with a doubled kāf and subjunctive verbs: one woman reminds the other if she errs; فتذكر is coordinated with تضل and أن stands where كي would. TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the two forms are synonymous dialects and that he reads فتذكر with a doubled kāf. IBNMUJAHID (حمزة): Hamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra and فتذكر with doubled kāf and indicative ending; the others use open أن and a subjunctive verb, except Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr, who lighten the verb. IBNKHALAWAYH-HUJJA (author): فتذكر may be doubled or light and jussive, indicative, or subjunctive: it can continue the conditional, begin a clause after fa, or be governed by the open أن. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Hamza alone reads إن تضل with kasra and فتذكر geminated in the nominative; the others open أن and use accusative فتذكر, with Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr lightening its kāf. FARISI-HUJJA (ابن كثير وأبو عمرو): Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr read فتذكر lightly, using the hamzated causati
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
