<<chunk 32, part 1 of 0..5>>
interpret 'when called' as a summons to undertake testimony, which witnesses must accept; this makes taking testimony a communal obligation. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority interprets the summons as one to give testimony already borne; a witness must answer when personally required, otherwise the duty is communal. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority treats witnessing sales as guidance and recommendation, not obligation; the report of the Prophet's disputed horse purchase and Khuzaima's extraordinary testimony supports this. BIQAI-FULL (author): Witnesses should be present whenever parties trade, immediately or later, whether for business or another purpose; this instruction is guidance, not an obligation. ALUSI-FULL (author): The command to seek witnesses is considered recommended or obligatory according to the broader disagreement over these commands. ELMALILI (author): A summons to bear or give testimony must not be refused: testimony is a collective duty, and becomes individually obligatory when nobody else can meet the need or particular people are required. ELMALILI (author): The majority of exegetes regard witnessing a sale here as a recommendation for precaution. ELMALILI (author): Although giving testimony is especially important, necessity can make both accepting and giving testimony individually obligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (جمهور السلف): The majority of early authorities interpret the command to obtain two witnesses as obligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): The later majority of jurists, including Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; the discussion continues at the command to witness sales. IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن الحاجب): Ibn al-Ḥājib says bearing witness is a communal duty when needed, while giving testimony from a distance of two barīd is an individual duty and cannot be replaced by an oath. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حنيفة): The author applies the earlier disagreement about scribes: accepting the request to bear witness becomes individual when designated, and giving testimony is individually obligatory if it causes no bodily or financial harm; Abū Ḥanīfa makes performance communal unless uniquely required, subject to court integrity, proximity, admissibility, and a claimant’s request. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري): Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, Abū Saʿīd, Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib, Mujāhid, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, ʿAṭāʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿī, Jābir ibn Zayd, Dāwūd, and al-Ṭabarī take witnessing at sales as obligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī, followed by Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; they cite the Prophet’s sales without witnesses."}, {"id": "2:282/q52/p2", "position": "Responding is recommended or optional when others can serve", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (عطية العوفي): ʿAṭiyya al-ʿAwfī treats the rule as a recommendation for a man or woman invited to give new testimony, not as an obligation. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ is also reported to say that an invitation to give new testimony is a recommendation that may be accepted or declined. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ regards writing and witnesses as recommendation and permission like the commands in 5:2 and 62:10: documenting is good but leaving it is harmless. | mentions 5:2, 62:10 WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says scholars in the Ḥijāz and Iraq agree that sale witnesses are not mandatory and that buyers can choose; they treat the following trust clause as abrogating the obligation. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (author): Taking witnesses is guidance and recommendation in ordinary transactions; most jurists require witnesses for marriage, though Malik does not. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Witness the sale in particular or every sale as safer; most imams recommend the commands, while some require them and debate whether they remain effective or are abrogated. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس، قتادة، الربيع؛ عطاء، الحسن؛ الشعبي): Ibn ʿAbbās, Qatāda, and al-Rabīʿ read the summons as initial bearing; ʿAṭāʾ and al-Ḥasan consider it advisory, while al-Shaʿbī requires it when no other witness exists. BURSEVI (author): Witness sales either in this particular transaction or generally as a precaution; the majority take the verse’s commands as recommendations. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): When a cash transaction is immediately completed, the writing requirement is lifted though witnesses remain recommended, because disputes can arise even without a term."}, {"id": "2:282/q52/p3", "position": "Responding is a communal obligation", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Some say the command that a scribe not refuse was abrogated by the instruction not to harm a scribe or witness; the adopted practice is the first view, communal obligation. STUDYQURAN (author): The testimony stipulation is particular to this circumstance and addresses social or communal difficulties; the approval of witnesses also suggests competence in this specialized area."}, {"id": "2:282/q52/p4", "position": "The duty's force varies with need and available witnesses.", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): They say the order to write was abrogated by the prohibition against harming a writer or witness; al-Qurṭubī calls this remote because a universal obligation was never established and paid document-writing is permitted."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q53", "question": "What incident illustrates refusal to witness?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q53/p1", "position": "Reports describe people refusing a request to serve as witnesses.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says the clause forbids refusing an initial request to witness rights; he recounts a man calling through a large encampment with no one answering, and reads the verse as testifying for one person against another. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ reports the same setting: people summoned in a large gathering would not follow the caller to testify. THALABI (قتادة والربيع): Qatada and al-Rabiʿ report that people once refused when asked to witness in a large neighborhood, prompting this verse. KASHSHAF-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda says a verse was revealed after a man visited a large gathering and nobody followed him, illustrating refusal to respond. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (قتادة): Qatāda relates an occasion of revelation in which a man passed through a large gathering at Ḥirāʾ and no one accompanied him. DURR-FULL (قتادة): Qatada reports the same occasion: people in a large neighborhood ignored a man's call to testify, so the verse was revealed. ELMALILI (author): Qatada relates that the verse was revealed after a man went from camp to camp seeking a witness and no one paid attention."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q54", "question": "What does تسأموا mean?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q54/p1", "position": "Saʾama means growing weary or irritated.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. AKHFASH (author): تسأم is from the verb سئمت, with the listed verbal nouns سآمة, سأمة, سآما, and سأما. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): ولا تسأموا means do not grow tired. TAB-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a small or large debt until its term; a written record keeps track of both the due date and amount. TAB-FULL (author): The verb تسأموا means “do not tire”; Labīd and Zuhayr use سئمت in the sense of becoming weary. ZAJJAJ (author): The author argues that the next command not to tire of writing reinforces that giving testimony from the outset is obligatory. ZAJJAJ (الراجز): A rajaz poet uses السآمة for weariness, illustrating the verb سئمت. NAHHAS (author): The anonymous verse سئمت تكاليف الحياة is cited as usage evidence for the verb سئمت. THALABI (author): Tasʾamu means grow weary; the cited lines by Zuhayr and Labid attest the verb for tiring of life or its length. THALABI (author): An may be a verbal noun object, meaning tire of writing it, or governed by an omitted preposition, meaning tire of writing it. WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن وأبو إسحاق): Al-Ḥasan says the duty covers both undertaking and delivering testimony when the person is available and has no excuse; Abū Isḥāq chooses this view, supported by the adjacent command not to tire of documenting what one witnessed. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Saʾāma means weariness or annoyance; the infinitive clause is accusative as the object of that weariness, and the pronouns in write it and its due date refer to the debt. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The command not to tire of writing is best addressed to creditors: document the rights they lend, small or large, with due date and term; the passage begins by addressing asset and debt holders, while trivial amounts are not normally recorded. JISHUMI (العامة): The common reading uses second-person feminine/masculine address in لا تسأموا. JISHUMI (author): Saʾam means weariness or boredom, becoming annoyed with something. JISHUMI (author): An alternative construction supplies the omitted preposition من: do not tire of writing it. JISHUMI (author): Do not tire of documenting the debt, whether small or large, and continue through its due date; another view refers to the witness’s term. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): A reading has yāʾ for both occurrences of ‘they grow weary.’ KASHSHAF-FULL (النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم): A Prophetic saying says a believer does not say ‘I am lazy’; weariness can mean laziness, a hypocrite’s trait. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Frequent debtors may tire of preparing a separate document for each small or large debt. TABRISI (author): Ḍalāl originally means loss or going where something cannot be found; saʾam is weariness, and أقسط means acted justly while قسط means acted unjustly. | mentions 54:47 TABRISI (author): The command may address witnesses and mean not to tire of recording testimony; the stronger referent of its term is the debt's due date, not the witness's allowable period. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Do not grow weary of re
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
