<<chunk 32, part 5 of 0..5>>
while قسط means acted unjustly. | mentions 54:47 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن السيد عن ابن السكيت عن أبي عبيدة، ابن القطاع): Lexicographers report qasaṭa as both just and unjust, while aqsaṭa with hamza means only just, making aqsaṭ regular."}, {"id": "2:282/q59/p4", "position": "Aqsaṭ means more just or equitable.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author): ذلكم أقسط is a subject-predicate clause; وأقوم is coordinated, and أدنى أن لا is accusative with an understood من."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q60", "question": "How does writing steady testimony?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q60/p1", "position": "Writing makes testimony firmer by preserving exact details.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أن تضل means that one woman forgets the testimony and the other reminds her; Moses' phrase uses ضالّ for forgetful. | mentions 26:20 IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أقسط means more just; the record strengthens testimony because it reminds witnesses of all they witnessed. TAB-FULL (author): Written documentation makes testimony more accurate because it preserves the parties' exact acknowledged words, keeps witnesses' accounts aligned, and makes judgment clearer; obeying God's command is itself more just than abandoning it. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects Ibn ʿUyaynah's “making her male” interpretation: it contradicts the exegetes and misunderstands error in testimony as forgetfulness, when the forgetful witness needs reminding. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī says one woman may forget the testimony and the other reminds her. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): More upright for testimony means more accurate for testimony. IBNABIHATIM (سفيان): More upright for testimony means more firmly established testimony. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The testimony is called so one woman may forget and the other remind her; as Sibawayh explains, forgetting is the cause that makes reminding necessary, not the intended outcome. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Aqwam for testimony means either more upright or better preserved, from qiyām meaning keeping watch. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Writing is most equitable because God commanded it, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and most nearly prevents doubt. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The majority read an tadhilla in the subjunctive, coordinated with fa-tadhakkara, meaning one woman may forget her testimony and the other remind her of the hearing. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Aqsaṭ means more just, aqwam more supportive of testimony, and the directions make doubt less likely. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Following Sībawayh, aqsaṭ and aqwam may derive regularly from verbs or by analogy from qāsiṭ and qayyim, meaning possessed of justice and uprightness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The purpose clause does not mean that testimony is taken in order for a woman to err; two women are appointed so one can remind the other if she forgets. Sibawayh compares this construction to preparing a prop for a wall if it leans. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If aqwam means ‘more firmly establishing,’ it too is a comparative from a quadriliteral; deriving it from qāma, ‘to be upright,’ removes the irregularity. TABRISI (سيبويه): Sībawayh says testimony is requested so one woman may remind the other; possible forgetfulness is the reason for reminding, like shoring a wall because it may lean. TABRISI (author): Writing the debt or testimony is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and closer to preventing doubt; قسط means fairness and الأقسط means acting justly. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (أبو علي): Abu ʿAli rejects Ibn ʿUyayna’s view: no number of women’s testimony suffices without a man, and forgetfulness should be answered by a reminder. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Do not grow weary of recording small or large debts customarily deferred, through their due date; the document is more just, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and more nearly removes doubt. RAZI-FULL (author): Aqwam means more upright; writing supports accurate testimony through preservation and memory, serving worldly benefit, while the first benefit serves religion and is placed first to prioritize religion. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Some accept a blind person's voice-based testimony as certain, but al-Qurṭubī rejects this because it would imply that a sighted person could likewise rely on sound alone. QURTUBI-FULL (سفيان بن عيينة وأبو عمرو بن العلاء): Ibn ʿUyayna and Abū ʿAmr understand the lighter reading of the reminder verb as returning a woman's testimony to memory, so two women's testimony totals a man's. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Writing is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and likelier to prevent doubt about debt kind, amount, date, and witnesses; aqsaṭ and aqwam have irregular morphological analyses. NASAFI-FULL (author): The two-witness clause explains that one woman may forget the testimony and the other remind her; Ḥamza reads the verb with nominative and gemination under the conditional, while Makki and Baṣri read it accusatively from dhikr. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجحدري، عيسى بن عمران، حميد بن عبد الرحمن، مجاهد، زيد بن أسلم): Variants include passive tadhalla “be forgotten,” a form meaning testimony goes astray, fa-tudhakkiru “then she reminds,” and reciprocal fa-tadhākara. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Forgetfulness means failing to find one's way in testimony through forgetting or inattention, answered by reminding. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He agrees with al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn ʿAṭiyya: the reading fails linguistically because the verb is not recorded with that causative sense, and logically because both women's testimony, not one woman's reminder, would make the equivalent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “More reliable for testimony” means firmer and sounder; deriving aqwam from aqāma is irregular to some grammarians, while qāma avoids that issue. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī allows aqwam to derive from aqāma under Sibawayh's approach or as a relational form from qawīm. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The lām in “for testimony” attaches to aqwam with object-like meaning; omitting it and using a direct accusative is restricted to poetry. SAMIN-DURR (author): Because أذكرته is causative and takes two objects, the omitted second is testimony: one woman reminds the other of her testimony after forgetting. SAMIN-DURR (author): Aqwam may come from transitive aqāma with its extra hamza removed, meaning firmer for establishing testimony; the analogy is 18:12. | mentions 18:12 SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa derives aqwam from intransitive qāma, meaning that testimony itself is more firmly established. SAMIN-DURR (author): The lām in ‘for testimony’ attaches to aqwam and is semantically an object; it is extra if aqwam means ‘establish,’ but not if it means ‘be established.’ SAMIN-DURR (author): The wāw in aqwam is valid because a comparative can follow the pattern of the exclamative, which functions like a noun. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Writing deferred transactions is guidance that better preserves the amount and due date and keeps the testimony accurate, as the verse's stated rationale explains. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a debt, large or small, through its due date; writing deferred claims is more just before God, strengthens testimony by helping witnesses remember, and reduces doubt in disputes. BURHAN (سيبويه والبصريون): For this verse, neither “lest one err” nor “for fear of error” makes error a sensible purpose of testimony; the intended purpose is reminder if one forgets, with error as its trigger, like preparing a prop to support a wall if it leans. BIQAI-FULL (author): One woman may lose or forget some testimony, so the other reminds her; the verse makes this the reason two women stand in place of one man. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Write every debt, small or large, through its due date because writing better records the term and money, is fairer, strengthens testimony, and reduces doubt; spot trade may be left unwritten. BURSEVI (author): Documenting it to the due date is fairest before God, strengthens testimony, and best prevents doubt about the debt, amount, term, or witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): The two-woman provision explains the testimony rule: if one forgets, the other reminds her; al-Alusi attributes forgetfulness to women’s temperaments. ALUSI-FULL (author): Aqwam retains its wāw because the root is frozen in the exclamatory form; the comparative has a meaning that supports this form. ALUSI-FULL (سيبويه): Sibawayh allows the comparatives aqsaṭ and aqwam to be formed directly from verbs, without treating them as irregular. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Aqsatu derives from the quadriliteral aqsaṭa, meaning to act justly, not from qaṣaṭa, meaning to act unjustly; aqwamu derives from aqāma al-shahāda. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author answers that a nisba from a verbal noun resembles a derivative because the verbal noun is the origin of derivation, and suggests aqwamu may also come from qawuma and yield the adjective qawīm."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
