<<chunk 32, part 2 of 0..5>>
cording small or large debts customarily deferred, through their due date; the document is more just, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and more nearly removes doubt. RAZI-FULL (author): Saʾāma means weariness or irritation; the instruction encourages writing small and large debts because even a small dispute can grow into serious conflict. QURTUBI-FULL (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash explains the verb for becoming weary as boredom and gives its verbal nouns; an unnamed poet illustrates weariness after eighty years of life. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Do not tire of recording any debt, small or large and brief or detailed, until its agreed due date; that refers to writing. NASAFI-FULL (الشاعر): A poet uses s-simt to express becoming weary with life after eighty years, supporting the sense of ولا تسأموا as do not tire. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Saʾm and saʾāma mean boredom or irritation with something. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Become weary” is explained as “be lazy” or “be annoyed”; grammarians debate whether saʾima takes its object directly or through a preposition. A hadith and 4:142 are parallels for laziness. | mentions 4:142 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “write it” refers to the earlier debt or nearby right, equivalent in sense; those with many debts might tire of documentation. SAMIN-DURR (author): Saʾam and saʾāma mean weariness, boredom, and annoyance with something. SAMIN-DURR (السلمي): Al-Sulami reads the clause with third-person yāʾ, matching his reading of ‘they tire of writing.’ IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Dihya and Usāma b. Zayd were affiliated with Kalb b. Wabara of Quḍāʿa; Quḍāʿa was variously said to descend from ʿAdnān, from Qaḥṭān, or to be an independent branch, and Ibn Kathīr leaves the matter to God. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a debt, large or small, through its due date; writing deferred claims is more just before God, strengthens testimony by helping witnesses remember, and reduces doubt in disputes. BIQAI-FULL (author): People must not tire of documenting either small or large debts through their due date; the separate warning magnifies a duty people might neglect. BURSEVI (author): Do not tire of documenting a debt, large or small, whether summarized or detailed, through its agreed due date. ALUSI-FULL (author): Some take saʾama as laziness by euphemism, since the Qurʾan describes hypocrites as praying lazily; a hadith says a believer should say prayer feels burdensome, not lazy. | mentions 4:142 ALUSI-FULL (author): Saʾama means to tire of or become annoyed by something; the verse discourages weariness over recording debt. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Transitions are finely connected and barely noticed, holding listeners’ attention and relieving the weariness of extended recitation. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The small and large debts represent trivial and substantial amounts; since small transactions are more frequent, parties are told not to tire of recording them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The prohibition concerns the result of weariness—leaving the debt unwritten—because involuntary boredom itself cannot be prohibited. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Another interpretation takes sāmah as a figurative expression for laziness and laxity. TABATABAI (author): He defines the key terms: mutual debt, dictation, shortchanging, weariness, causing harm, disobedience, and the two plural forms for pledged collateral. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (القاموس): Al-Qamus glosses sa'ima as becoming bored or weary, providing the basic meaning behind the command not to tire of recording debts. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (ابن الأثير): Ibn al-Athir explains the prophetic phrase Allah does not become weary until you do as meaning that He does not tire as you tire. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الراغب): Al-Raghib sharpens the sense to weariness from repetition or prolonged duration, citing Qur'anic usage and Zuhayr's poem about life's burdens. | mentions 41:38, 41:49 BINTSHATI-IJAZ (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas's gloss of sa'ama as lassitude describes a result or outward sign of weariness, rather than a separate basic meaning."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q55", "question": "What does the pronoun in أن تكتبوه refer to?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q55/p1", "position": "The pronoun denotes the debt or right", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid says the object to be written is the debt. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Tabari takes write it to mean documenting the debt due at the appointed time, whether from a sale or loan, then introduces a dispute about whether writing is obligatory or recommended. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Saʾāma means weariness or annoyance; the infinitive clause is accusative as the object of that weariness, and the pronouns in write it and its due date refer to the debt. JISHUMI (author): The pronoun in تكتبوه refers to the debt/right owed. JISHUMI (author): The pronoun in إلى أجله may refer to the debt's term or to the witness's term of eligibility; the debt's term is the stronger reading. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Mentioning debt supplies the antecedent for ‘write it,’ improves the wording, and distinguishes deferred from immediate debt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘Write it’ can refer to the debt or right; small or large describes the debt, or the document’s concise or full length without omission. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الطبري): Al-Tabari takes the pronoun in “his guardian” to refer to the right/debt and cites reports from al-Rabiʿ and Ibn Abbas. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): La tasʾamu means ‘do not tire’; ṣaghīran and kabīran are circumstantial descriptions of the object, with the small item mentioned first for emphasis. Repeated debt recording could make people weary of writing. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd say the pronoun refers to the debtor, so his guardian dictates. RAZI-FULL (author): The pronoun in أن تكتبوه must refer back to either the debt or the right mentioned earlier. NASAFI-FULL (author): The pronoun in أن تكتبوه may refer to the debt or the document; small or large can describe the debt's value, supporting salam in textiles, or describe a concise or detailed record. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The word dَayn supplies the pronoun in fa-ktubūhu; it also disambiguates tadāyantum, emphasizes the reference, and generalizes to any size or type of debt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “his guardian” refers to the debtor, one of the three vulnerable cases; al-Zamakhsharī identifies an executor, agent, or interpreter who dictates with the debtor's approval. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī takes the pronoun to refer to the debt, making the guardian the creditor; this is also related from Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Rabīʿ. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The pronoun in “write it” refers to the earlier debt or nearby right, equivalent in sense; those with many debts might tire of documentation. SAMIN-DURR (author): The pronoun in ‘write it’ may refer to the debt or the right; the latter is nearer, though it also means the debt. SAMIN-DURR (author): منه attaches to يبخس, with من marking origin and the pronoun referring to the debt; alternatively it is an omitted adjective of an indefinite, fronted as a circumstantial. SAMIN-DURR (author): The pronoun in وليه refers to the debtor when he has one of the three stated limitations; بالعدل repeats the earlier construction. SAMIN-DURR (author): The pronoun in فاكتبوه returns to دين; that noun is repeated to provide an antecedent, disambiguate reciprocal تداينوا, or indicate every amount of debt. BURHAN (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhshari says debt is stated explicitly so the pronoun in write it has an antecedent. BURHAN (author): The usual order puts the pronoun's antecedent first, as in the debt verse; in another construction the first object is delayed so the pronoun refers to the nearer second object. ALUSI-FULL (قيل): Some say dayn is mentioned to provide an explicit antecedent for the later pronoun; others say it improves the wording, but the objection that tadāyantum already supplies the sense is answered because it does not clearly identify the debt itself. ALUSI-FULL (author): The object of writing may be the debt, right, or written record implied by the verb; the verb can take it directly, or an understood preposition may be omitted. IBNASHUR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr takes both pronouns about fearing God and not reducing the amount to refer to the debtor, who must acknowledge the whole debt rather than shortchange the creditor. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Adding bi-dayn may be emphatic, or it may provide the noun resumed by write it; al-Zamakhshari says it also makes clear the distinction between deferred and immediate debts. TABATABAI (author): The explicit pronoun in “he cannot dictate” makes the debtor share the work with his guardian; unlike earlier cases, the guardian handles only what the debtor cannot."}, {"id": "2:282/q55/p2", "position": "The pronoun refers to the debt or right recorded.", "reasons": "THALABI (author): An may be a verbal noun object, meaning tire of writing it, or governed by an omitted preposition, meaning tire of writing it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Tudhakkiru takes an omitted object, “the testimony”; the wording implies a witness must remember testimony and cannot rely only on writing, supported by 43:86. | mentions 43:86 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The closing catalogue identifies ellipsis and explains implied subjects and objects in writing, dictation, testimony, repayment, and not concealing testimony. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): A third analysis makes the phrase a circumstantial clause referring to the pronoun in ‘write it.’ SAMIN-DURR (author): أن يكتب is the direct object of لا يأب. كما علمه الله may modify that writing or attach to the later فليكتب; the Sheikh finds the latter strained by word order and فاء. BURHAN (author): The fourth kind negates a qualifier of the subject or object; in I saw no writing man, it may weakly imply seeing a nonwriter, while denying the seein
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
