<<chunk 32, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q52", "question": "Is the summons duty individual, communal, or advisory?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q52/p1", "position": "Responding is individually obligatory when needed", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī says an initial request to witness is obligatory only when no other suitable witness is available, by broader duties to preserve a fellow Muslim's right, not by this verse itself. TAB-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī treat witnessing at sale as recommended or optional, citing the permission to rely on trust. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that witnessing every purchase and sale is an obligatory duty, because divine commands bind unless evidence shows a recommendation; he rejects abrogation by the trust clause. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says answering an initial request is optional when others are available, but obligatory if no other witness can be found. ZAJJAJ (author): The author argues that the next command not to tire of writing reinforces that giving testimony from the outset is obligatory. NAHHAS (الفراء): Some say recording deferred debts and witnessing sales are recommendations, by analogy with commands that grant permission after a prohibition. | mentions 2:282 NAHHAS (عبد الله بن عمر): Ibn Umar says witnessing is obligatory for every sale, large or small, citing the command to witness sales. | mentions 2:282 THALABI (الشعبي): The debt record, witnesses, and pledge were initially obligatory, then the trust clause abrogated that requirement. | mentions 2:283 THALABI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi says accepting a witness role is optional when another witness is available and obligatory when the person is the only one. THALABI (آخرون): Other scholars treat witnessing sales as recommended, leaving the parties free to call witnesses or not. MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك وداود بن علي): Witnessing sales is obligatory. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي ومالك والشافعي): Witnessing sales is recommended. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء وابن جريج وإبراهيم وابن جرير): A group, chosen by Ibn Jarīr, treat writing and witnessing deferred debts as obligatory to protect wealth and deter denial; Ibrāhīm says even a tiny handful of greens should be documented. WAHIDI-BASIT (آخرون): Others say writing, witnesses, or collateral were initially obligatory but were abrogated by the trust clause in 2:283, which permits leaving documentation when the parties trust each other. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (قتادة والربيع): Qatāda and al-Rabīʿ say the ban on refusing applies when asked to undertake testimony; al-Shaʿbī makes it obligatory only if no one else can do so. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): An immediate exchange of goods is exempt from writing because the risks of delayed payment are absent; witnessing spot sales is also no longer obligatory under the abrogated ruling. DAMGHANI (author): The two women witnesses are unidentified women, not a named individual or pair. JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing rights. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (الحسن والشافعي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shāfiʿī regard witnessing sales as recommended, which Jishumi says is the jurists’ position. JISHUMI (author): If the verse concerns bearing testimony, that duty is variously described as communal obligation, recommendation, or permission; if giving testimony, it is communal when others can do it and individual when no substitute exists. JISHUMI (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing a sale obligatory. JISHUMI (author): Writing and witnessing are guidance and recommendation, not obligation, since a creditor may waive the right itself and need not document it as a precaution. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some consider writing obligatory, but most deem the command recommendatory; al-Shaʿbi says writing, witnessing, and pledging were obligatory then abrogated by the trust provision. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi holds that writing, witnessing, and pledging were initially obligatory and that the instruction to fulfill a trusted deposit abrogated all three. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): One view says witnesses are called to undertake testimony; some therefore make answering obligatory, while al-Hasan requires it only when no one else is available, and others recommend it in every case. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He considers witnessing a binding command for both small and large transactions, cash or credit; Abu Saʿid al-Khudri leaves it to mutual trust, while others call it recommended. | mentions 2:283 KASHSHAF-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing obligatory even for a bunch of greens. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The sound view is that witnessing makes a transaction prudent while mutual trust leaves room; no abrogation follows, because documentation is recommended as a precaution for rights people may waive, and 2:283 instructs debtors to repay when trusted. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): He prefers al-Hasan’s inclusive reading: the verse recommends both forms of assistance. With ample witnesses and no danger to the right, a summoned person may decline for even a slight excuse; otherwise declining without excuse earns neither sin nor reward. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): When necessity or a real risk of losing a right arises, the recommendation approaches obligation; if delay will certainly destroy the right, testimony is obligatory, especially when it was already acquired and the summons is to deliver it, as a trust owed. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan, al-Shaʿbī, and others say witnessing a transaction is recommended; Ibn ʿAmr and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say it is obligatory, followed by Ibn ʿUmar's practice and ʿAṭāʾ, with al-Ṭabarī preferring obligation. IBNATIYYA-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds obligation untenable: witnessing tiny sales is burdensome, while larger dealings may rely on social trust or customary practice. He prefers recommendation unless an excuse prevents it. TABRISI (الحسن وجميع الفقهاء): Al-Ḥasan and the jurists regard witnessing sales as recommended; the Ẓāhirīs make it obligatory. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Witnessing is recommended for transactions where it is customary. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الجمهور): The majority treat writing debts and witnessing sales or debts as recommended, so the command remains operative without abrogation. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عمر): A group including Ibn ʿUmar, Abu Musa, Mujahid, Ibn Sirin, and others regard writing and witnessing as obligatory. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (القاضي أبو يعلى): Qadi Abu Yaʿla says a witness must attend to perform testimony only if no one else can testify; both bearing and performing it are communal duties like jihad. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Razi favors testimony performance: the witnesses are already called witnesses, and the command is obligatory for all, whereas accepting testimony is not required of everyone. RAZI-FULL (author): If the witness is uniquely available, giving testimony is an individual duty; if many can testify, it is a communal duty. RAZI-FULL (عطاء وابن جريج والنخعي والطبري): ʿAtaʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿi, and al-Tabari hold that writing and witnessing deferred debts are obligatory; al-Nakhaʿi even requires witnessing a tiny vegetable purchase. RAZI-FULL (الشافعي وأبو حنيفة): Al-Shafiʿi and Abu Hanifa reject an enslaved person as a witness, reasoning that the command to attend testimony cannot be obligatory for slaves. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Seeking witnesses is recommended, not obligatory, as al-Qurṭubī explains later. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya treats assistance as recommended when witnesses are plentiful, increasingly urgent when rights may be lost, and obligatory when delay will destroy a right. QURTUBI-FULL (author): Al-Qurṭubī rejects the view that testimony already held is merely recommended: it is obligatory when a right risks loss, supported by Qurʾānic commands and the Prophet's call to aid the wronged. | mentions 65:2, 43:86 QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī reads the witnessing command as covering small and large sales; Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, and others hold it obligatory, and ʿAṭāʾ demands witnesses for tiny purchases. QURTUBI-FULL (الشعبي والحسن): Al-Shaʿbī and al-Ḥasan treat witnessing as recommendation and guidance rather than a binding duty; Mālik, al-Shāfiʿī, and other jurists are also said to hold this. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds mandatory witnessing impractical for small sales and sometimes socially awkward; he treats it as recommended for its usual benefit unless an excuse intervenes. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt verse is established, not abrogated, and writing, pledges, and witnesses are alternative means of securing debt; witnessing is recommended like pledging. | mentions 2:283 NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnesses are called witnesses before they testify because the anticipated event is treated as already actual; the first command is obligatory in principle and the second recommended. NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnessing sales is recommended for immediate and deferred exchanges as a precaution, or the command concerns immediate trade alone, where testimony suffices without writing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya combines both readings: assistance is recommended when witnesses are plentiful, nearly obligatory in necessity, and obligatory if delay would destroy the right, especially when summoned to perform testimony already borne. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري، ابن عمر، الضحاك، ابن المسيب، جابر بن زيد، مجاهد، عطاء، إبراهيم، الشعبي، النخعي، داود بن علي): They hold witnessing obligatory; al-Ḍaḥḥāk requires it even for greens and ʿAṭāʾ for any price. Al-Ṭabarī says an unwitnessed sale defies God's Book. IBNKATHIR-FULL (قتادة والربيع بن أنس): They 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
