<<chunk 32, part 4 of 0..5>>
r records the term and money, is fairer, strengthens testimony, and reduces doubt; spot trade may be left unwritten. ALUSI-FULL (author): The phrase to its term describes the debt remaining due until its agreed maturity, not the writing, which takes little time. ELMALILI (author): Every debt, large or small, should be documented in detail through its due date, including all particulars and qualities, rather than dismissed as too minor to write."}, {"id": "2:282/q57/p2", "position": "The phrase marks the debt's due date.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): The accusative أن can be construed with the following verb as a verbal noun or with an omitted preposition meaning from writing it until its term. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa attaches ‘until its term’ directly to ‘write it.’ IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur reads آمن عليه as believing because of the sign and according to its terms: each prophet’s miracle addressed a field especially admired and beyond his people."}, {"id": "2:282/q57/p3", "position": "The phrase denotes the duration of witness testimony", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): In أن تكتبوه صغيرا أو كبيرا, الشاهد is understood; إلى أجله refers to the deadline through which the testimony is valid. TAB-FULL (author): A Basran grammarian construes “to its term” as the term for the witness, meaning the time during which testimony is valid."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q58", "question": "What does ذلكم point back to?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q58/p1", "position": "That refers to writing", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The demonstrative “that” refers to the written document. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The agreed term is the time the parties named; dhālikum points to writing as a verbal noun. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Do not tire of recording any debt, small or large and brief or detailed, until its agreed due date; that refers to writing."}, {"id": "2:282/q58/p2", "position": "The demonstrative points to the preceding documentation practice.", "reasons": "WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Dhālikum refers to the documentation; it is more equitable with God because following God’s command is more just than neglecting it. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The demonstrative points to the preceding documentation rules collectively, and the verse supports grounding one legal ruling in several reasons."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q59", "question": "What does أقسط mean and derive from?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q59/p1", "position": "Aqsaṭ is more just, from a verb of equity", "reasons": "MAJAZ (author): أقسط means more just. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أقسط means more just; the record strengthens testimony because it reminds witnesses of all they witnessed. TAB-FULL (author): Written documentation makes testimony more accurate because it preserves the parties' exact acknowledged words, keeps witnesses' accounts aligned, and makes judgment clearer; obeying God's command is itself more just than abandoning it. TAB-FULL (author): “That” means recording the debt through its due date; أَقْسَط means more just and comes from the verb for judging equitably, unlike قَسَط, which means to act unjustly. | mentions 72:15 TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī glosses أَقْسَط as “more just in God's sight.” TAB-FULL (author): Writing every debt, large or small, makes the transaction more just, gives witnesses a sounder basis, and helps prevent doubt about the amount and due date. IBNABIHATIM (السدى): The prescribed documentation is more just before God; Saʿid ibn Jubayr and Sufyan agree. THALABI (author): A written record is more just, steadier for testimony, and less likely to leave doubt about the amount or term; the author compares this with another verse about giving testimony properly. | mentions 5:108 MAWARDI-FULL (author): Aqsaṭ means more just; aqsaṭa is to act justly, while qasaṭa is to act unjustly, as the cited verses show. | mentions 49:9, 72:14 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Dhālikum refers to the documentation; it is more equitable with God because following God’s command is more just than neglecting it. JISHUMI (author): Qisṭ means justice and derives from turning toward the truth; aqsaṭa describes acting justly. JISHUMI (author): The writing is more just before God because he commanded it, and obeying his command is more just than leaving it; it is also sounder for testimony and nearer to removing doubt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Aqsaṭ means more just, aqwam more supportive of testimony, and the directions make doubt less likely. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Following Sībawayh, aqsaṭ and aqwam may derive regularly from verbs or by analogy from qāsiṭ and qayyim, meaning possessed of justice and uprightness. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Aqsaṭ means ‘more just’; its comparative form is anomalous if derived from the quadriliteral, but may follow aqram from karam, with aqsaṭ meaning just and qasiṭ meaning unjust. TABRISI (author): Writing the debt or testimony is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and closer to preventing doubt; قسط means fairness and الأقسط means acting justly. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Do not grow weary of recording small or large debts customarily deferred, through their due date; the document is more just, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and more nearly removes doubt. RAZI-FULL (author): Al-Qaffal takes ذالكم as referring to the commanded writing and witnessing; writing is more just because it is closer to certainty and truth and further from ignorance and falsehood. | mentions 60:8, 49:9, 33:5 RAZI-FULL (author): Qist is justice and iqsat its verbal noun; the related forms mean acting justly or acting unjustly, as illustrated by other Qur’anic passages. | mentions 60:8, 49:9, 72:15 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Writing is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and likelier to prevent doubt about debt kind, amount, date, and witnesses; aqsaṭ and aqwam have irregular morphological analyses. NASAFI-FULL (author): Writing is more equitable before God, better supports testimony, and reduces doubt about amount and qualities by providing a written reference. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): He prefers deriving aqsaṭ from triliteral qasaṭa meaning “act justly,” avoiding the alleged morphological irregularity. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “More just with God” means more just under God's judgment because it prevents oppression. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “That is more just” points either to writing alone or to writing, testimony, and all prior means of documentation; aqsaṭ means more equitable, though its derivation is debated. SAMIN-DURR (author): One derivation takes ‘more equitable’ from quadriliteral aqsaṭ, ‘act justly’; this makes the hamza privative but requires an anomalous comparative from a quadriliteral. SAMIN-DURR (author): Another derivation takes it from qist, ‘justice,’ a noun without a verb; this avoids deriving a comparative from ifʿāl. SAMIN-DURR (أبو عبيدة): Abu Ubayda, as cited through Ibn al-Sikkit, distinguishes qasaṭ as injustice or justice by vocalization, while aqsaṭ always means justice. SAMIN-DURR (الراغب الأصفهاني): Al-Raghib says taking another’s share is qist and injustice, while giving that share is iqsaṭ and fairness. SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘With God’ is an adverb modifying ‘more equitable,’ meaning in God’s judgment. SAMIN-DURR (author): The comparison’s second term is omitted because context supplies it: writing is more equitable, stable, and doubt-free than leaving the debt undocumented. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a debt, large or small, through its due date; writing deferred claims is more just before God, strengthens testimony by helping witnesses remember, and reduces doubt in disputes. BIQAI-FULL (ابن السيد): Ibn al-Sayyid reports that qasata can mean either injustice or justice; here aqsatu means more equitable, preserving balance without shortchanging. DURR-FULL (عائشة): Aisha glosses 'more equitable' as 'more just.' ALUSI-FULL (أبو حيان): Abu Hayyan, citing Ibn al-Qattaʿ, says qasṭ means justice, so aqsaṭ needs no special derivation from a noun. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Writing is more just because it better preserves the right, supports giving testimony, and reduces doubt; these three reasons make evidence clear and free of suspicion. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Aqsatu derives from the quadriliteral aqsaṭa, meaning to act justly, not from qaṣaṭa, meaning to act unjustly; aqwamu derives from aqāma al-shahāda. IBNASHUR-FULL (الزمخشري): Al-Zamakhsharī derives aqsatu from qāsiṭ, meaning possessing a share of justice; the author finds the pattern and derivation from a noun problematic."}, {"id": "2:282/q59/p2", "position": "Its comparative derivation is debated", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL (author): The comparative forms أقسط and أقوم follow Sībawayh's derivation from the causative verbs اقسط and أقام. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الزمخشري، ابن عطية): Al-Zamakhsharī derives aqsaṭ from aqsaṭa, while Ibn ʿAṭiyya questions its derivation; the author discusses comparative morphology. SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Zamakhshari says the comparatives may derive from aqsaṭ and aqāma, or from nisba forms meaning ‘possessing equity’ and ‘upright.’ SAMIN-DURR (ابن عطية): Ibn Atiyya derives aqsaṭ from the triliteral qasuṭ with ḍamma, like akram from karuma. ALUSI-FULL (سيبويه): Sibawayh allows the comparatives aqsaṭ and aqwam to be formed directly from verbs, without treating them as irregular. IBNASHUR-FULL (سيبويه): Al-Sībawayh permits comparative forms from hamzated quadriliteral verbs, whether the hamza makes a verb transitive or not; al-Zamakhsharī alternatively analyzes aqsatu as a nisba form."}, {"id": "2:282/q59/p3", "position": "The root can also denote injustice depending on form or vowel", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): Ḍalāl originally means loss or going where something cannot be found; saʾam is weariness, and أقسط means acted justly 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
