<<chunk 32, part 3 of 0..5>>
g itself is another weak reading. IBNASHUR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk, with a report from ʿAṭāʾ, regards the scribe’s duty as abrogated by the ban on harming a scribe or witness; the author objects that writing is not ordinarily harm except in rare cases such as great distance. | mentions 2:282"}, {"id": "2:282/q55/p3", "position": "The pronoun denotes the written document", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (الزمخشري): Zamakhshari says the pronoun may refer to the written document understood from ‘write it.’"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q56", "question": "What do صغيرا أو كبيرا describe?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q56/p1", "position": "The adjectives concern the debt's amount", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): The written record should include the debt whether it is small or large. TAB-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a small or large debt until its term; a written record keeps track of both the due date and amount. IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل): Debts of any size, small or large, are equally to be witnessed and written. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Record small and large debts through their due dates because writing better preserves the due date and amount. NAHHAS (author): صغيرا أو كبيرا is circumstantial, referring to whether the debt is small or large. THALABI (author): Small or large describes whether the debt or amount is slight or substantial; the forms can be parsed as circumstantial modifiers or as predicates of an implied kāna. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Small or large debts should be written through their due date; “small” does not mean trivial amounts such as a qirat or daniq, outside customary usage. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): The command not to tire of writing is best addressed to creditors: document the rights they lend, small or large, with due date and term; the passage begins by addressing asset and debt holders, while trivial amounts are not normally recorded. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses must not refuse when summoned to bear or give testimony; parties should not let irritation keep them from recording a small or large debt through its due date. JISHUMI (author): The phrase can be parsed as a circumstantial clause, or as a predicate of an elided كان: ‘whether the debt is small or large.’ JISHUMI (author): Do not tire of documenting the debt, whether small or large, and continue through its due date; another view refers to the witness’s term. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The pronoun in writing it refers to the claim; small and large mean little or much, through the time it falls due. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Frequent debtors may tire of preparing a separate document for each small or large debt. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘Write it’ can refer to the debt or right; small or large describes the debt, or the document’s concise or full length without omission. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): La tasʾamu means ‘do not tire’; ṣaghīran and kabīran are circumstantial descriptions of the object, with the small item mentioned first for emphasis. Repeated debt recording could make people weary of writing. TABRISI (author): Do not weary of recording a debt, small or large, until its term; this is fairer, steadier testimony, and less likely to leave doubts about amount or term. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Do not grow weary of recording small or large debts customarily deferred, through their due date; the document is more just, strengthens testimony by reminding witnesses, and more nearly removes doubt. RAZI-FULL (author): Saʾāma means weariness or irritation; the instruction encourages writing small and large debts because even a small dispute can grow into serious conflict. RAZI-FULL (author): The command does not conventionally extend to trivial amounts such as a grain or qirat, since such things are not normally written down. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The writing phrase is accusative after the verb, and small or large are circumstantial descriptions; small comes first for emphasis, since people might neglect tiny debts. QURTUBI-FULL (علماؤنا): The jurists except a tiny amount such as a qirat because people do not normally care to affirm or deny it. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Do not tire of recording any debt, small or large and brief or detailed, until its agreed due date; that refers to writing. NASAFI-FULL (author): The pronoun in أن تكتبوه may refer to the debt or the document; small or large can describe the debt's value, supporting salam in textiles, or describe a concise or detailed record. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Recording every debt and due date protects property and prevents disputes; “small” comes first to stress that minor debts matter, and the due date is the parties' agreed term. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الماتريدي، author): Al-Māturīdī infers advance sale of clothing from “small or large”; Abū Ḥayyān objects that these words mean little or much, including amounts of grain. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Small or large” is a state of the debt being written; supplying omitted kāna is misplaced. “Until its due date” means the debt remains established in liability until maturity, not that writing lasts the entire term. SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘Small or large’ is circumstantial: either the debt is small or large, or the written record is brief or detailed. BURHAN (author): One proposed most hopeful verse is the debt passage: God’s care reaches even the recording of small debts, suggesting hope from such great concern for people. | mentions 2:282 BURHAN (author): Explicitly naming the debt shows that witness-taking applies to small as well as large debts, as the verse later states. BIQAI-FULL (author): People must not tire of documenting either small or large debts through their due date; the separate warning magnifies a duty people might neglect. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali explains small and large by each debtor's perception and means, rather than the absolute quantity that little and much would describe. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Write every debt, small or large, through its due date because writing better records the term and money, is fairer, strengthens testimony, and reduces doubt; spot trade may be left unwritten. ALUSI-FULL (author): Small and large describe the debt’s amount or its level of detail; alternatively they are predicates of an omitted kāna, with the smaller stated first for emphasis and progression. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The small and large debts represent trivial and substantial amounts; since small transactions are more frequent, parties are told not to tire of recording them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Small precedes large, unlike the expected order, to emphasize complete coverage, since small debts are more frequent and might be neglected, while mentioning only small debts could imply large ones need no writing. | mentions 2:255"}, {"id": "2:282/q56/p2", "position": "Small and large describe the size of the debt.", "reasons": "THALABI (الضحاك ومحمد بن جرير): Al-Dahhak treats witnessing as a firm divine command for every transaction, small or large and cash or deferred; Muhammad ibn Jarir prefers this view. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He considers witnessing a binding command for both small and large transactions, cash or credit; Abu Saʿid al-Khudri leaves it to mutual trust, while others call it recommended. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī interprets “witness when you transact” as applying to transactions both small and large. RAZI-FULL (author): Bidayn can also generalize the rule to small or large transactions and to loans, salam, or deferred sales. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī reads the witnessing command as covering small and large sales; Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, and others hold it obligatory, and ʿAṭāʾ demands witnesses for tiny purchases. SAMIN-DURR (السجاوندي): Al-Sajawandi treats ‘small or large’ as the predicate of an implied kāna; the author says this is unnecessary and unsupported here."}, {"id": "2:282/q56/p3", "position": "The adjectives concern a brief or detailed record", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Anyone selling for a fixed future date was commanded to document the transaction, whether small or large."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q57", "question": "How does إلى أجله attach?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q57/p1", "position": "The phrase denotes the debt's maturity", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. TAB-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a small or large debt until its term; a written record keeps track of both the due date and amount. TAB-FULL (author): “That” means recording the debt through its due date; أَقْسَط means more just and comes from the verb for judging equitably, unlike قَسَط, which means to act unjustly. | mentions 72:15 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Witnesses must not refuse when summoned to bear or give testimony; parties should not let irritation keep them from recording a small or large debt through its due date. JISHUMI (author): Do not tire of documenting the debt, whether small or large, and continue through its due date; another view refers to the witness’s term. TABRISI (author): Do not weary of recording a debt, small or large, until its term; this is fairer, steadier testimony, and less likely to leave doubts about amount or term. SAMIN-DURR (author): The phrase ‘until its term’ most clearly modifies an implied phrase: the debt remains established in liability until it falls due. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Do not grow weary of recording a debt, large or small, through its due date; writing deferred claims is more just before God, strengthens testimony by helping witnesses remember, and reduces doubt in disputes. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Write every debt, small or large, through its due date because writing bette
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
