<<chunk 33, part 0 of 0..3>>
{"id": "2:282/q61", "question": "What is meant by أدنى ألا ترتابوا?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q61/p1", "position": "It prevents doubt about amount and due date", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Do not tire of recording even a small amount through its due date: writing better records the term and protects property, is just, reliable for testimony, and less likely to create doubt. TAB-FULL (author): Writing every debt, large or small, makes the transaction more just, gives witnesses a sounder basis, and helps prevent doubt about the amount and due date. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Documentation prevents doubt about the right, due date, and testimony; al-Suddi and Sufyan specify avoiding doubt in testimony, while Muqatil links the clause to what is recorded. THALABI (author): A written record is more just, steadier for testimony, and less likely to leave doubt about the amount or term; the author compares this with another verse about giving testimony properly. | mentions 5:108 WAHIDI-BASIT (author): Written records make testimony more reliable because they remind witnesses, instead of leaving them to impressions; aqwam means more fully upright, and adnā means closer to removing doubt about amount and term. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): Writing is fairest before God, makes testimony more reliable because the record reminds witnesses, and best prevents doubt about amount or due date. TABRISI (author): Do not weary of recording a debt, small or large, until its term; this is fairer, steadier testimony, and less likely to leave doubts about amount or term. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Writing is more just before God, more reliable for testimony, and likelier to prevent doubt about debt kind, amount, date, and witnesses; aqsaṭ and aqwam have irregular morphological analyses. NASAFI-FULL (author): Writing is more equitable before God, better supports testimony, and reduces doubt about amount and qualities by providing a written reference. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Doubt may concern denial by the debtor, a witness forgetting, the testimony, amount or due date, or uncertainty for witness, judge, and parties. BURSEVI (author): Documenting it to the due date is fairest before God, strengthens testimony, and best prevents doubt about the debt, amount, term, or witnesses. ALUSI-FULL (author): Writing and witnessing make doubts about a debt’s kind, amount, and maturity less likely; the omitted preposition before an taرتابوا is variously understood as ila, lam, min, or fi."}, {"id": "2:282/q61/p2", "position": "It prevents denial or doubt generally", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): أدنى ألا ترتابوا means less likely to doubt. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): More likely to prevent doubt means more fitting to do so. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Adna means ‘nearer,’ and tartābū means ‘doubt.’ IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): In the debt verse, adnā means more likely or more conducive to avoiding doubt. | mentions 4:3, 5:108"}, {"id": "2:282/q61/p3", "position": "Documentation brings the parties nearer to freedom from doubt.", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Adnā derives from nearness and means closer; al-dunyā is named for being nearer than the hereafter. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (علي بن عبيد الله): Adnā is the elative form of d-n-w, meaning nearness or proximity. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Dihya and Usāma b. Zayd were affiliated with Kalb b. Wabara of Quḍāʿa; Quḍāʿa was variously said to descend from ʿAdnān, from Qaḥṭān, or to be an independent branch, and Ibn Kathīr leaves the matter to God."}, {"id": "2:282/q61/p4", "position": "It prevents doubt about testimony or a witness's memory", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): أدنى means nearer, and the writing brings the parties closer to certainty rather than doubt about the testimony. TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī explains the phrase as ensuring that people will not doubt the testimony. DAMGHANI (author): Adnā means more likely or more fitting: documenting a debt makes doubt less likely and testimony more reliable. | mentions 4:3, 5:108, 33:51"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q62", "question": "What is the scope of the cash-trade exception?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q62/p1", "position": "Immediate trade is exempt from writing only", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that recording a fixed-term debt and the scribe's duty to write are binding unless proof establishes recommendation; the trust exception applies when writing or a scribe is unavailable, so it does not abrogate the ordinary rule. | mentions 2:283 IBNABIHATIM (السدى): The exemption from writing refers to transactions between people present in the same town. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The exception from writing applies to immediate trade. THALABI (author): The exemption from writing applies to the cash transaction, while witnesses are still commanded when a sale takes place. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): An immediate exchange of goods is exempt from writing because the risks of delayed payment are absent; witnessing spot sales is also no longer obligatory under the abrogated ruling. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The exception is an immediate exchange in which each party must deliver what it contracted for at once; ʿAsim reads tijāratan in the accusative, treating the funds as the commerce, and writing is waived to avoid burden in ordinary purchases. RAZI-FULL (author): The exception for immediate trade may be connected to the debt-writing command or to the writer’s duty, or disconnected as a separate concession; ease and immediate exchange explain the concession. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين): Most exegetes say immediate trade is exempt from writing but remains subject to witnessing, which is easier and avoids later memory failure. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The exception covers present trade managed hand to hand, whether exchanging debt or goods, where writing is less necessary to prevent dispute and forgetfulness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The exception is disconnected because immediate sales are not deferred debts; writing may be omitted because it protects against uncertainty about amount, description, and term. Other views connect the exception to the debt or writing command. SAMIN-DURR (مكي ابن أبي طالب): Makki b. Abi Talib calls the exception disconnected; the author prefers this reading as the apparent sense, permitting omission of writing and witnesses for immediate trade. BIQAI-FULL (author): The exemption from writing applies to cash trade, because merchandise circulates and is not held by one person for long. ALUSI-FULL (author): The cash-trade exception is best read as a detached exception from the writing command: immediate exchange of both countervalues permits leaving the transaction unwritten. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other analyses make the exception detached from both writing and witnessing, or attach it to both; al-Alusi favors the first analysis. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The connected-exception reading takes immediate trade to mean a debt due soon and exempts that debt from writing, but the author considers this remote. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The explicit statement that there is no blame restates the exception and signals a concession; writing nevertheless remains preferable."}, {"id": "2:282/q62/p2", "position": "Immediate trade is exempt from both writing and witnesses", "reasons": "FARISI-HUJJA (author): أن in إلا أن تكون تجارة عن تراض منكم is accusative and governed by لا تأكلوا through إلا; both exceptions are disconnected. Sibawayh reports an accusative reading of تجارة. | mentions 4:29 ALUSI-FULL (أبو حيان): The Dur al-Masun allows a connected exception from witnessing: cash trade is exempt from witnessing in every case."}, {"id": "2:282/q62/p3", "position": "The exception is grammatically connected", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa treats the trade exception as connected: from all transactions requiring testimony, it excludes the case of present trade."}, {"id": "2:282/q62/p4", "position": "The exception is disconnected from deferred debt", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The immediate-trade exception qualifies the general range of transactions; it may be a disconnected exception because an immediate cash sale is not a debt."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q63", "question": "What is تجارة حاضرة تديرونها?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q63/p1", "position": "It is an immediate hand-to-hand exchange", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): An immediate cash trade with no term may go unwritten; sales should be witnessed, but a scribe or witness should not be pressured when occupied if another can be found. TAB-FULL (author): The exception permits leaving a written record for immediate cash trade because each party receives what is due before parting; it does not cover deferred or credit transactions. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says debts due at a term must be documented, while immediate hand-to-hand trades should be witnessed though writing is waived. TAB-FULL (author): Even when cash trades need not be written, both parties should have witnesses for every sale, large or small, immediate or deferred, to prevent either buyer or seller from losing a right through denial and lack of proof. ZAJJAJ (author): Most readers raise تجارة: the exception means ‘unless a cash trade takes place’; ʿĀṣim’s accusative reading means ‘unless the debt transaction is a cash trade.’ IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): An immediate transaction means an exchange conducted hand to hand. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): The exception from writing applies to immediate trade. NAHHAS (author): Asim reads the exception as meaning the debt is a cash trade. FARISI-HUJJA (author): The exception means the debt need not be written when an immediate hand-to-hand sale occurs, because same-session exchange requires no documentary or pledged security. 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
