<<chunk 33, part 2 of 0..3>>
is read nominative with kāna complete or incomplete, or accusative in an excepted construction illustrated by poetry. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عاصم): ʿĀṣim reads tijāratan in the accusative; the other readers read it in the nominative, though Abū ʿAlī is unsure about Ibn ʿĀmir. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): With nominative, kāna means “occur” and needs no predicate; with accusative, its event sense is absent and an omitted subject or predicate is supplied, such as “unless the transaction is a trade.” TABRISI (author): With the nominative reading, كان means “occur” or “happen,” so the phrase means that a present trade occurs. TABRISI (عاصم): ʿĀṣim alone reads تجارة حاضرة in the accusative; the others read it nominative. RAZI-FULL (author): An takuna may use kāna for occurrence, or incomplete kāna with تجارة حاضرة as its subject and تديرونها as predicate; al-Farraʾ gives the latter parse. RAZI-FULL (عاصم): ʿAsim reads تجارة in the accusative, while the other readers use the nominative. BAYDAWI-FULL (عاصم): Asim reads tijāratan in the accusative as a predicate with an omitted subject; the other readers make it nominative, either with tadīrūnahā as predicate or as a complete verb. NASAFI-FULL (author): Other readings analyze يكون as complete, meaning an immediate transaction occurs, or as incomplete with تجارة حاضرة as its subject and تديرونها as predicate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عاصم، الباقون): ʿĀṣim reads “trade, present” in the accusative, with kāna incomplete; others use nominative and a complete verb. SAMIN-DURR (author): ʿAsim reads ‘trade’ and its adjective in the accusative; in al-Nisaʾ the two other Kūfan readers agree, while the rest read both nominative. | mentions 4:29 SAMIN-DURR (author): With nominative, kāna may be complete, meaning a trade occurs; ‘you circulate it’ is then an adjectival clause, a more idiomatic order. SAMIN-DURR (الفراء): Alternatively, kāna is incomplete: ‘trade’ is its subject and ‘you circulate it’ its predicate; al-Farraʾ and others adopt this. NASHR (الباقون): The other readers read both words in تجارة حاضرة in the nominative. ALUSI-FULL (author): Other grammarians make the implied subject refer to the transaction and treat trade as a verbal noun; most readers use the nominative, with trade as subject and the clause as predicate, or take kāna as complete. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Most readers vocalize tijāratun as nominative with kāna complete; ʿĀṣim reads it accusative with kāna incomplete and an understood noun repeated as predicate. QIRAAT-ER (author): Nominative tijāratun makes kāna complete, meaning that a present trade exists, rather than taking an accusative predicate; both are canonical. QIRAAT-ER (author): Nominative ḥāḍiratun agrees with the nominative tijāratun reading and the complete-verb analysis of kāna."}, {"id": "2:282/q64/p2", "position": "Accusative تجارة: kāna has an omitted subject", "reasons": "AKHFASH (author): تكون in إلا أن تكون تجارة حاضرة can mean 'occur'; alternatively it can take an accusative predicate with an implied subject, تلك. TAB-FULL (بعض الناس): Some assume the accusative reading requires the masculine form يكون, as though its sense were “unless it be a trade.” ZAJJAJ (author): Most readers raise تجارة: the exception means ‘unless a cash trade takes place’; ʿĀṣim’s accusative reading means ‘unless the debt transaction is a cash trade.’ NAHHAS (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash construes تجارة as the subject of تكون; others take تديرونها as its predicate. FARISI-HUJJA (author): أن in إلا أن تكون تجارة عن تراض منكم is accusative and governed by لا تأكلوا through إلا; both exceptions are disconnected. Sibawayh reports an accusative reading of تجارة. | mentions 4:29 THALABI (عاصم): Asim reads the immediate-trade exception in the accusative as a predicate of kāna with its subject omitted; the syntax is explained further in the next segment. THALABI (author): The majority reading raises tijāra under either an existential sense of kāna or as its subject, with تديرونها بينكم as predicate. WAHIDI-BASIT (عاصم): ʿĀṣim reads tijāratan ḥāḍiratan in the accusative; Abū Isḥāq understands an implied present debt transaction. JISHUMI (عاصم): Asim reads تجارة in the accusative as the predicate of كان, with an omitted subject: unless the trade is a trade. BAGHAWI-FULL (عاصم): Asim reads tijāratan ḥāḍiratan in the accusative, supplying an omitted subject: the trade or transaction is a present trade. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): The exception is an immediate exchange in which each party must deliver what it contracted for at once; ʿAsim reads tijāratan in the accusative, treating the funds as the commerce, and writing is waived to avoid burden in ordinary purchases. RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj parses the accusative by supplying مداينة as the subject, while Abu ʿAli al-Farisi objects that a debt transaction cannot be immediate trade. NASAFI-FULL (عاصم): ʿĀṣim reads the phrase so تجارة is the noun of كان or an appositional clarification of trade. SAMIN-DURR (الزجاج): For ʿAsim’s accusative reading, al-Zajjaj supplies an omitted subject for kāna, estimating ‘debt transaction.’ NASHR (عاصم): ʿĀṣim reads both words in تجارة حاضرة in the accusative. ALUSI-FULL (عاصم): Asim reads tijaratan in the accusative as the predicate of kāna, with an implicit subject referring to trade."}, {"id": "2:282/q64/p3", "position": "The case of tijāra depends on how kāna is parsed.", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Abu Jaafar reads tijāratan hāḍiratan with an ungeminated rāʾ; Ibn Kathir and Abu Amr read furuhun with both rāʾ and hāʾ vocalized and without the alif."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q65", "question": "What does no blame for leaving it unwritten mean?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q65/p1", "position": "No blame means omission is permitted without sin", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): No blame means no hardship or difficulty. THALABI (قوم): Writing the debt is recommended and discretionary: documenting it is good, but leaving it carries no blame. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): For most exegetes, “no blame” means no harm in omitting writing because writing is not obligatory; those who require it interpret the phrase as “no sin.” SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa says the fāʾ in ‘there is no blame’ signals that the following clause depends on the preceding one. ELMALILI (author): The exception is a fully cash, hand-to-hand commercial transaction; in that case leaving it unwritten causes no blame. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The explicit statement that there is no blame restates the exception and signals a concession; writing nevertheless remains preferable."}, {"id": "2:282/q65/p2", "position": "Omitting a written record of immediate trade incurs no blame.", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): An immediate cash trade may go unwritten because no harm results from omitting a record. ALUSI-FULL (author): There is no harm or sin in omitting written records for immediate exchanges, because they are less exposed to dispute and forgetfulness or because writing them is burdensome."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q66", "question": "Must sales be witnessed?", "turns_on": "Whether the command binds, recommends, or was superseded by trust.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q66/p1", "position": "Witnessing sales is obligatory", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says immediate cash sales may go unwitnessed, but deferred sales must be written and witnessed while the parties are settled. IBNABIHATIM (الضحاك): All sales deferred for a short or long term must be written and witnessed until their due date. NAHHAS (عبد الله بن عمر): Ibn Umar says witnessing is obligatory for every sale, large or small, citing the command to witness sales. | mentions 2:282 MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك وداود بن علي): Witnessing sales is obligatory. WAHIDI-BASIT (عطاء وابن جريج وإبراهيم وابن جرير): A group, chosen by Ibn Jarīr, treat writing and witnessing deferred debts as obligatory to protect wealth and deter denial; Ibrāhīm says even a tiny handful of greens should be documented. JISHUMI (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing a sale obligatory. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He considers witnessing a binding command for both small and large transactions, cash or credit; Abu Saʿid al-Khudri leaves it to mutual trust, while others call it recommended. | mentions 2:283 KASHSHAF-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk considers witnessing obligatory even for a bunch of greens. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan, al-Shaʿbī, and others say witnessing a transaction is recommended; Ibn ʿAmr and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say it is obligatory, followed by Ibn ʿUmar's practice and ʿAṭāʾ, with al-Ṭabarī preferring obligation. TABRISI (الحسن وجميع الفقهاء): Al-Ḥasan and the jurists regard witnessing sales as recommended; the Ẓāhirīs make it obligatory. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (ابن عمر): A group including Ibn ʿUmar, Abu Musa, Mujahid, Ibn Sirin, and others regard writing and witnessing as obligatory. RAZI-FULL (عطاء وابن جريج والنخعي والطبري): ʿAtaʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿi, and al-Tabari hold that writing and witnessing deferred debts are obligatory; al-Nakhaʿi even requires witnessing a tiny vegetable purchase. QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī reads the witnessing command as covering small and large sales; Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, and others hold it obligatory, and ʿAṭāʾ demands witnesses for tiny purchases. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري، ابن عمر، الضحاك، ابن المسيب، جابر بن زيد، مجاهد، عطاء، إبراهيم، الشعبي، النخعي، داود بن علي): They hold witnessing obligatory; al-Ḍaḥḥāk requires it even for greens and ʿAṭāʾ for any price. Al-Ṭabarī says an unwitnessed sale defies God's Book. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Witness a sale whether deferred or immediate; harming the scribe or witness in violation of the command is disobedience, and one must fear God. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو موسى الأشعري): Abū Mūsā, Ibn ʿUmar, Abū Saʿīd, Saʿīd ibn al-Musayyib, Mujāhid, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, ʿAṭāʾ, Ibn Jurayj, al-Nakhaʿī, Jābir ibn Zayd, Dāwūd, and al-Ṭabarī take witnessing at sales as ob
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
