<<chunk 33, part 3 of 0..3>>
ligatory. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Witnesses are also required for a sale without debt when it is not ordinary immediate commerce, completing the categories of debt, credit sales, immediate trade, and immediate noncommercial sales. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that witnessing every purchase and sale is an obligatory duty, because divine commands bind unless evidence shows a recommendation; he rejects abrogation by the trust clause. | mentions 2:283"}, {"id": "2:282/q66/p2", "position": "Witnessing sales is recommended", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī treat witnessing at sale as recommended or optional, citing the permission to rely on trust. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says the parties may choose whether to witness their sale. NAHHAS (الفراء): Some say recording deferred debts and witnessing sales are recommendations, by analogy with commands that grant permission after a prohibition. | mentions 2:282 THALABI (آخرون): Other scholars treat witnessing sales as recommended, leaving the parties free to call witnesses or not. MAWARDI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي ومالك والشافعي): Witnessing sales is recommended. JISHUMI (الحسن والشافعي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shāfiʿī regard witnessing sales as recommended, which Jishumi says is the jurists’ position. JISHUMI (author): Writing and witnessing are guidance and recommendation, not obligation, since a creditor may waive the right itself and need not document it as a precaution. KASHSHAF-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says one may choose whether to witness a sale. IBNATIYYA-FULL (القاضي أبو محمد): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds obligation untenable: witnessing tiny sales is burdensome, while larger dealings may rely on social trust or customary practice. He prefers recommendation unless an excuse prevents it. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Witnessing is recommended for transactions where it is customary. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عطية): Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds mandatory witnessing impractical for small sales and sometimes socially awkward; he treats it as recommended for its usual benefit unless an excuse intervenes. NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnessing sales is recommended for immediate and deferred exchanges as a precaution, or the command concerns immediate trade alone, where testimony suffices without writing. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الجمهور): The majority treats witnessing sales as guidance and recommendation, not obligation; the report of the Prophet's disputed horse purchase and Khuzaima's extraordinary testimony supports this. ITQAN (author): Commands can remind of favor, express wonder or equal treatment, give practical guidance as in witnessing sales, show contempt, warn, or honor the addressee. BURSEVI (author): Witness sales either in this particular transaction or generally as a precaution; the majority take the verse’s commands as recommendations. ELMALILI (author): The majority of exegetes regard witnessing a sale here as a recommendation for precaution. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): The later majority of jurists, including Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; the discussion continues at the command to witness sales. IBNASHUR-FULL (مالك): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī, followed by Mālik, Abū Ḥanīfa, al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad, regard witnessing as recommended; they cite the Prophet’s sales without witnesses. QURTUBI-FULL (الشعبي والحسن): Al-Shaʿbī and al-Ḥasan treat witnessing as recommendation and guidance rather than a binding duty; Mālik, al-Shāfiʿī, and other jurists are also said to hold this. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن العربي): Ibn al-ʿArabī says only al-Ḍaḥḥāk is reported to require witnessing; the Prophet made and recorded sales without witnesses and pledged his armor without them. QURTUBI-FULL (طارق بن عبد الله المحاربي): Ṭāriq ibn ʿAbd Allāh recounts selling a camel to a man later identified as the Prophet; the Prophet sent word for the sellers to take dates and eat until satisfied, without witnesses at the sale. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author answers the argument from unwitnessed sales by limiting those cases to contexts of mutual trust and refers to the following trust provision; he also rejects Ibn ʿAṭiyya’s earlier rationale. | mentions 2:283 STUDYQURAN (author): Women may conduct sales and loans for themselves, including transactions without witnesses; the witness provision therefore serves another purpose. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The sound view is that witnessing makes a transaction prudent while mutual trust leaves room; no abrogation follows, because documentation is recommended as a precaution for rights people may waive, and 2:283 instructs debtors to repay when trusted. | mentions 2:283 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الجمهور): The majority treat writing debts and witnessing sales or debts as recommended, so the command remains operative without abrogation. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt verse is established, not abrogated, and writing, pledges, and witnesses are alternative means of securing debt; witnessing is recommended like pledging. | mentions 2:283"}, {"id": "2:282/q66/p3", "position": "Witnessing a sale is urged as a safeguard.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): An immediate cash trade with no term may go unwritten; sales should be witnessed, but a scribe or witness should not be pressured when occupied if another can be found. TAB-FULL (author): Even when cash trades need not be written, both parties should have witnesses for every sale, large or small, immediate or deferred, to prevent either buyer or seller from losing a right through denial and lack of proof. IBNABIHATIM (مجاهد): For a cash sale, take witnesses without writing; for a deferred sale, write and take witnesses. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Witness all sales to protect one’s rights, whether payment is deferred or immediate; Jabir ibn Zayd, Mujahid, ʿAta, and al-Dahhak agree. THALABI (author): The exemption from writing applies to the cash transaction, while witnesses are still commanded when a sale takes place. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Witness any sale, immediate or deferred, as a precaution against disputes; alternatively, witnessing alone can suffice for immediate trade without writing. QURTUBI-FULL (الشافعي): Al-Shāfiʿī classifies sales as documented with witnesses, secured by a pledge, or based on trust, reading the verse as evidence for these forms. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عمر): Ibn ʿUmar would obtain witnesses for cash sales and write down deferred sales. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Witnessing all sales, immediate or deferred, is safer against disagreement; another interpretation limits the command to present trade. DURR-FULL (جابر بن زيد): Jabir ibn Zayd bought a whip and had witnesses, following the command to witness sales. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak likewise says to witness a sale even of a small bundle of greens. ALUSI-FULL (author): Witness when you make the specified sale, or, according to a broader reading, whenever a sale is made. ELMALILI (author): For any sale, including a cash sale, make it openly in the presence of witnesses rather than secretly; this precaution protects property and legal security. STUDYQURAN (author): Forward contracts could span years, and women might be less socially available to witness them over time; spot sales need no written contract because delivery and payment are simultaneous."}, {"id": "2:282/q66/p4", "position": "The trust clause abrogated the sales-witness duty", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the command to witness sales was abrogated by the clause allowing trusted dealings; al-Shaʿbi reports similarly. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): An immediate exchange of goods is exempt from writing because the risks of delayed payment are absent; witnessing spot sales is also no longer obligatory under the abrogated ruling. JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing rights. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some consider writing obligatory, but most deem the command recommendatory; al-Shaʿbi says writing, witnessing, and pledging were obligatory then abrogated by the trust provision. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi holds that writing, witnessing, and pledging were initially obligatory and that the instruction to fulfill a trusted deposit abrogated all three. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Some say witnessing is abrogated by the trust exception in 2:283; al-Mahdawī records this view and Makkī attributes it to Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس): Al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥakam, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd are reported to say that the mutual-trust clause abrogated witnessing sales. | mentions 2:283 BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Witness the sale in particular or every sale as safer; most imams recommend the commands, while some require them and debate whether they remain effective or are abrogated. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الجحدري، الحسن، عبد الرحمن بن يزيد، الحكم): They say the witnessing command was abrogated by the permission to trust one another. IBNKATHIR-FULL (الشعبي والحسن): They say the command to witness sales was abrogated by the option to trust one another and return the entrusted property in 2:283. | mentions 2:283"}]}

<<end of chunk>>
