<<chunk 33, part 1 of 0..3>>
THALABI (author): The exception means an immediate, hand-to-hand transaction without a deferred term or credit need not be written. MAWARDI-FULL (author): An immediate trade may be a cash sale with no deferred term in either price or merchandise, or goods the buyer takes into possession. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Managing a trade between yourselves may mean passing the goods hand to hand or repeatedly trading them. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Not writing an immediate cash trade is permitted, though the command does not require its record. WAHIDI-BASIT (author): A current sale that the parties transact hand to hand can omit documentation because the risks of deferred payment and term are absent. JISHUMI (author): The exception is an immediate cash sale, hand to hand, with no deferred term; documenting it is not required and causes no harm or financial burden. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The other readers use the nominative either with kāna meaning occur, or with trade as its subject and your exchanging it as its predicate; this is hand-to-hand trade without a term, which need not be written. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Present trade means exchanged goods and hand-to-hand exchange; an immediate sale need not be written because deferred-debt risks do not arise. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Witness any sale, immediate or deferred, as a precaution against disputes; alternatively, witnessing alone can suffice for immediate trade without writing. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Because documentation can be burdensome, God removes blame for leaving immediate cash transactions unwritten; such dealings are usually small purchases rather than property. Al-Suddī and al-Ḍaḥḥāk define them as immediate hand-to-hand exchange. TABRISI (author): A spot transaction exchanged hand to hand can be left unwritten because documentation is needed for deferred payment, not cash trade. RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj parses the accusative by supplying مداينة as the subject, while Abu ʿAli al-Farisi objects that a debt transaction cannot be immediate trade. RAZI-FULL (author): Commerce means dealing in property for profit, while تديرونها means exchanging directly hand to hand; the exemption removes hardship rather than declaring that omission is sinful. RAZI-FULL (author): The exception for immediate trade may be connected to the debt-writing command or to the writer’s duty, or disconnected as a separate concession; ease and immediate exchange explain the concession. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين): Most exegetes say immediate trade is exempt from writing but remains subject to witnessing, which is easier and avoids later memory failure. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين): Most exegetes include both a sale of present goods for deferred payment and salam, while excluding cash-for-cash and debt-for-debt exchanges. QURTUBI-FULL (author): God lifts writing requirements for cash exchanges, commonly small purchases, because writing them would be burdensome; al-Suddī and al-Ḍaḥḥāk specify hand-to-hand sales. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The exception covers present trade managed hand to hand, whether exchanging debt or goods, where writing is less necessary to prevent dispute and forgetfulness. NASAFI-FULL (author): Witnessing sales is recommended for immediate and deferred exchanges as a precaution, or the command concerns immediate trade alone, where testimony suffices without writing. NASAFI-FULL (author): Managing a spot trade means exchanging it hand to hand; there is no harm in leaving it unwritten because no debt-related suspicion arises. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Present trade means either cash sale without a term or a movable-goods sale, usually small; al-Suddī and al-Ḍaḥḥāk specify hand-to-hand exchange. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “You circulate it among yourselves” means passing goods hand to hand or repeated trading, implying taking possession. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Witnessing all sales, immediate or deferred, is safer against disagreement; another interpretation limits the command to present trade. SAMIN-DURR (مكي ابن أبي طالب): Makki b. Abi Talib calls the exception disconnected; the author prefers this reading as the apparent sense, permitting omission of writing and witnesses for immediate trade. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): An immediate cash trade may go unwritten because no harm results from omitting a record. BIQAI-FULL (author): The future term creates risk of forgetting, which explains the emphasis on writing; hand-to-hand trade is exempt because it is immediately exchanged and unlikely to be disputed. BIQAI-FULL (author): For immediate trade, Asim reads the phrase as an incomplete construction, while other readers use a complete verb; either way the trade is conducted among the parties. BIQAI-FULL (author): The exemption from writing applies to cash trade, because merchandise circulates and is not held by one person for long. BURSEVI (author): Immediate exchange with both parties present may be left unwritten because hand-to-hand trade is less prone to dispute and forgetting. ALUSI-FULL (أبو حيان): The Dur al-Masun allows a connected exception from witnessing: cash trade is exempt from witnessing in every case. ELMALILI (author): The exception is a fully cash, hand-to-hand commercial transaction; in that case leaving it unwritten causes no blame. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Tudīrūnahā baynakum explains the immediate trade and likely indicates why writing is dispensable: the parties’ exchange itself makes the transaction evident. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The connected-exception reading takes immediate trade to mean a debt due soon and exempts that debt from writing, but the author considers this remote. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Witnesses are also required for a sale without debt when it is not ordinary immediate commerce, completing the categories of debt, credit sales, immediate trade, and immediate noncommercial sales. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Reading the command as only referring to immediate trade and retaining witnesses without writing is very unlikely, since writing was instituted to support witnessing and documentation. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The segment catalogs Qur’anic uses of the no-blame formula in legal allowances, including immediate trade, pilgrimage, travel prayer, food, entering uninhabited houses, and other cases. | mentions 2:198, 4:101, 5:93, 24:29, 24:60, 24:61, 33:5, 60:10"}, {"id": "2:282/q63/p2", "position": "Present trade is a direct exchange without deferred obligation.", "reasons": "IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (author): A present trade means goods the parties buy and sell among themselves. BAGHAWI-FULL (عاصم): Asim reads tijāratan ḥāḍiratan in the accusative, supplying an omitted subject: the trade or transaction is a present trade. TABRISI (author): With the nominative reading, كان means “occur” or “happen,” so the phrase means that a present trade occurs. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa treats the trade exception as connected: from all transactions requiring testimony, it excludes the case of present trade. SAMIN-DURR (الفارسي): Al-Farisi rejects ‘debt transaction’ as kāna’s subject because a debt is an obligation, unlike the present trade named in the predicate. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Write every debt, small or large, through its due date because writing better records the term and money, is fairer, strengthens testimony, and reduces doubt; spot trade may be left unwritten. QIRAAT-ER (author): Nominative tijāratun makes kāna complete, meaning that a present trade exists, rather than taking an accusative predicate; both are canonical."}, {"id": "2:282/q63/p3", "position": "It denotes local goods or same-town exchange", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (السدي): Al-Suddī describes the exempt trade as local, visible goods exchanged directly, for which the parties need not write a record."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q64", "question": "How is تجارة حاضرة read and parsed?", "turns_on": "The case of تجارة and whether كان is complete.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q64/p1", "position": "Nominative تجارة: kāna is complete or takes the trading clause as predicate", "reasons": "FARRA (author): In إلا أن تكون تجارة حاضرة تديرونها, تديرونها may be accusative or nominative; an indefinite noun can take a verbal predicate in either position. FARRA (author): When the noun is overt, as in فإن كن نساء, the predicate can still be nominative or accusative, as in the cited trade construction. TAB-FULL (author): Most Hijaz, Iraqi, and other reciters raise تجارة حاضرة; some Kufans use the accusative, which is grammatically possible, but al-Ṭabarī prefers the widespread nominative reading. TAB-FULL (بعض نحويي البصرة): Some Basran grammarians treat kāna here as a complete verb meaning “exist” or “occur,” with تجارة حاضرة as its subject and no predicate. TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī says the complete-verb analysis is grammatically possible but less apt; تديرونها بينكم can be the predicate in the accusative or follow the indefinite تجارة حاضرة in the nominative. IBNMUJAHID (عاصم): Asim alone reads إلا أن تكون تجارة حاضرة with both words accusative; the other readers use nominative, though Abu Bakr hesitates about Ibn Amir. FARISI-HUJJA (author): Asim alone reads تجارة منصوب; the rest read it nominative, though Abu Bakr is unsure about Ibn Amir. WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو الحسن الأخفش): Al-Akhfash supplies an implicit kāna; it may take a predicate or be complete, with the complete verb preferred because it requires fewer omitted words, though either reading implies testimony by one man and two women. JISHUMI (author): For the nominative reading, one analysis supplies تقع: unless a trade occurs. JISHUMI (author): Another nominative analysis makes تجارة the subject of كان and the following clause its predicate, meaning a trade circulating among you. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The other readers use the nominative either with kāna meaning occur, or with trade as its subject and your exchanging it as its predicate; this is hand-to-hand trade without a term, which need not be written. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Trade 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
