<<chunk 34, part 3 of 0..5>>
s 2:233 IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (مجاهد والكلبي): Mujāhid and al-Kalbī explain لا يضار as not bothering a writer by distracting him from his trade or work. TAB-FULL (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿūd is reported to have read the phrase as ولا يضارر. NAHHAS (أبو إسحاق): Abu Ishaq prefers taking ولا يضار as a prohibition on the writer or witness causing harm, since the next clause calls such conduct sinful. THALABI (عمر وأبي وابن مسعود ومجاهد): Umar, Ubayy, Ibn Masʿud, and Mujahid read ولا يضارر with the doubled consonants made explicit, supporting the interpretation that the writer or witness is not to be harmed. TABRISI (author): One analysis derives لا يضار from doubled ر, with the writer and witness forbidden to depart from the truth. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Abu Jaʿfar reads yuḍār with a light ra and sukun. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين والحسن وطاوس وقتادة): Most exegetes, al-Hasan, Tawus, and Qatada read ولا يضار as forbidding the writer or witness from harming the rights-holder through falsification, omission, or ineffective testimony. ITQAN (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba’s first variation type changes case or vowel without changing meaning or form, illustrated by two readings of ولا يضار كاتب."}, {"id": "2:282/q68/p4", "position": "The passive form forbids parties to burden scribes and witnesses", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī prefers the passive reading, supported by ʿUmar's unassimilated reading: the opening addresses transaction parties, not writers and witnesses, and the warning fits parties forbidden to cause harm. SAMIN-DURR (عمر وابن عباس ومجاهد وابن أبي إسحاق): Al-Dani reports these authorities reading the first rāʾ with fatḥa, matching the passive interpretation."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q69", "question": "What is فسوق بكم?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q69/p1", "position": "Fusūq is sin, disobedience, or transgression", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): Fusūq here means sin and disobedience: whoever harms the scribe or witness has disobeyed God and committed what is forbidden. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): The verse calls it transgression whenever people do other than what God commanded. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): He glosses fusūq as disobedience. TAB-FULL (الربيع): He also glosses fusūq as disobedience. IBNABIHATIM (مقاتل بن حيان): Failing to follow God’s instructions in the debt verse is sin and disobedience; al-Dahhak reports similarly. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Harming the scribe or witness, or doing what was forbidden, is transgression; Ibn ʿAbbas reports similarly. IBNABIHATIM (ابن عباس): Transgression means disobedience; Mujahid, Saʿid ibn Jubayr, ʿAta ibn Dinar, and al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas report similarly. THALABI (author): The prohibited harm is disobedience and departure from God's command; the passage closes by commanding reverence and affirming God's knowledge. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد والضحاك): Fusuq means disobedience. MAWARDI-FULL (author): Fusuq may also mean sinfulness. WAHIDI-BASIT (الزجاج): Al-Zajjāj chooses the first interpretation because fisq suits a false witness or person who alters writing, not someone who merely summoned a busy witness; defenders of the second read fisq as sin and disobedience. DAMGHANI (author): Fusūq can mean a sin or offense that falls upon those who violate the instruction. JISHUMI (author): Taqwā here means avoiding disobedience and sin, or safeguarding trusts by discharging them. JISHUMI (author): The author's teachers say causing harm becomes fisq when it reaches a major degree; a minor case incurs the warning but is not fisq. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If harm means falsification by a writer or witness, fisq is the legal commission of grave sins and invalidating rights; if it means mistreatment or refusal, fisq means departing from what is right, though disobeying God's command approaches the legal sense too. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj argues that falsifying a document or testimony is the sort of harm called transgression in the next clause; merely summoning a busy person would not make one sinful. QURTUBI-FULL (سفيان الثوري): Sufyān al-Thawrī explains 'it is wrongdoing by you' as meaning a sinful act; falsifying testimony and imposing on busy witnesses are both disobedience. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Doing harm or another prohibited act is disobedience; fear God in violations, and He teaches laws containing people's welfare. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو حنيفة وأصحابه، مالك): The Ḥanafīs do not readmit testimony rejected for sinfulness or marriage but accept after rejection for slavery, unbelief, or childhood; Mālik also bars readmission after slavery or childhood. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Fear God” means avoiding harm or observing all commands and prohibitions; it follows the warning of transgression. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Under the active reading, “if you do so” means causing harm; fusūq bikum means transgression attached to you or located within you, the latter more emphatic. SAMIN-DURR (أبو البقاء): Abu al-Baqa supplies ‘incumbent upon you’ after ‘upon you’; the author instead supplies an unrestricted state as an adjective of ‘transgression.’ BURHAN (author): The author lists Qur’anic denunciations as signs that an act is forbidden, including calling it injustice, wrongful appropriation, sin, or fisq, as in the ban on harming scribes and witnesses. BURHAN (أبو الفتح): Abu al-Fath, from a Mu'tazili premise that human disobedience is not attributable to God, interpreted the form as meaning found rather than as causative. BIQAI-FULL (author): Breaking the prohibition is fisq, a departure from God's law; the emphatic form intensifies the warning. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Witness a sale whether deferred or immediate; harming the scribe or witness in violation of the command is disobedience, and one must fear God. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): Acting against God's instructions is disobedience; the instruction to fear God and learn from Him means to take and follow what He taught. BURSEVI (author): Violating the ban on harm is disobedience; believers should fear God in all His commands and prohibitions, and He teaches rulings that serve their interests and knows their conduct. ALUSI-FULL (author): The warned-against act is the prohibited harm or another breach; فسوق بكم means disobedience attached to you, or more forcefully a state in which you are immersed. ELMALILI (author): Causing such harm is a transgression against God’s obedience. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The omitted object of do refers to causing the prohibited harm; fusūq means grave sin, as in the denunciation of the term after faith. | mentions 49:11 TABATABAI (author): He defines the key terms: mutual debt, dictation, shortchanging, weariness, causing harm, disobedience, and the two plural forms for pledged collateral."}, {"id": "2:282/q69/p2", "position": "Fusūq means disobedience or sinful departure from the command.", "reasons": "ZAJJAJ (author): The author says asking a busy writer or witness to attend does not itself count as fisq. JISHUMI (author): According to the author's school, fisq is a term of blame. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Bikum implies “a state of fisq upon you”; the close of the verse admonishes and recounts God's favor, and another interpretation promises that piety teaches a person what is good."}, {"id": "2:282/q69/p3", "position": "Fusūq here specifically means lying or falsification", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): He instead reads fusūq as lying: a scribe distorts the dictated record or a witness changes testimony. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن زيد): Fusuq means lying."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q70", "question": "What does واتقوا الله command here?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q70/p1", "position": "The admonition concerns the harm prohibition", "reasons": "THALABI (author): The prohibited harm is disobedience and departure from God's command; the passage closes by commanding reverence and affirming God's knowledge. TABRISI (author): The verse threatens that harming a scribe or witness in writing or testimony is a departure from God's commands; fear God, who teaches what is needed and knows all. RAZI-FULL (author): The call to fear God may likewise refer narrowly to avoiding harm in this transaction or broadly to all commands and prohibitions. NASAFI-FULL (author): Causing such harm is sinful conduct; fear God in this duty, and God teaches the laws of religion without forgetfulness or deficiency. NASAFI-FULL (author): Harming the scribe or witnesses is sinful conduct; fear God in this duty. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “Fear God” means avoiding harm or observing all commands and prohibitions; it follows the warning of transgression. BURSEVI (author): Violating the ban on harm is disobedience; believers should fear God in all His commands and prohibitions, and He teaches rulings that serve their interests and knows their conduct. ALUSI-FULL (author): The debtor receives both a positive command to fear God and a prohibition on reducing the debt because self-interest naturally drives people to repel harm from themselves."}, {"id": "2:282/q70/p2", "position": "It concerns every command and prohibition in the passage", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): The debtor dictates the debt and must fear God, withholding none of it; if the debtor is wasteful and legally restricted, young, insane, or unable to dictate through speech difficulty or ignorance, the guardian dictates fairly. BIQAI-FULL (author): The debtor must fear God and avoid any shortfall; bakhs means a particularly severe reduction that wrongs the recipient. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The command to fear God presents piety as the basis of good conduct and abstention from wrongdoing; the teaching clause recalls Islam’s gift of knowledge of law and the order of life, and its present tense suggests its continuance."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q71", "question": "Does piety cause the teaching in ويعلمكم الله?", "turns_on": "The
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
