<<chunk 34, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q67", "question": "Who may harm whom under ولا يضار?", "turns_on": "Whether the assimilated verb is active, passive, or embraces both.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q67/p1", "position": "The prohibition prevents harm connected with writing or testimony.", "reasons": "ABDURRAZZAQ (قتادة): Qatada says a scribe is harmed by being made to write what was not dictated, and a witness by being made to attest what he did not witness. ABDURRAZZAQ (عمر): Ikrima reports Umar reciting the verb with a doubled r, as ‘ولا يضارر كاتب ولا شهيد.’ AKHFASH (author): ولا يضار can be parsed as a prohibition or as an indicative statement; compare لا تضار والدة بولدها, though that form was not read in the indicative. | mentions 2:233 TAB-FULL (author): On the first interpretation, the underlying form is ولا يضارر; the two identical rāʾ letters assimilate, with fatḥa used despite the jussive because it is the lightest vowel. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās glosses the harm as summoning a writer or witness who has a need, only for them to be told to ignore it and come anyway. TAB-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās also describes harm as compelling a person despite there being enough other witnesses, simply because the caller invokes the command to answer summonses. TAB-FULL (عمر): ʿUmar is reported to have read the phrase with an unassimilated doubled rāʾ, ولا يضارر. TAB-FULL (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿūd is reported to have read the phrase as ولا يضارر. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says callers must not harm writers or witnesses who explain they have a need; the caller should seek another person instead. TAB-FULL (ابن طاوس): Ibn Ṭāwūs says the writer or witness should not be harmed when saying “I have a need; let me go” by a claimant insisting “write for me.” TAB-FULL (author): Fusūq here means sin and disobedience: whoever harms the scribe or witness has disobeyed God and committed what is forbidden. TAB-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the original obligation to write was abrogated by the prohibition on harming a scribe or witness. ZAJJAJ (author): The view under discussion also bars summoning a witness when his attendance would harm him. IBNABIHATIM (قتادة): Do not harm the scribe by making him write what was not dictated, or the witness by making him testify to what was not requested; Zayd ibn Aslam agrees. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): Harming the scribe or witness, or doing what was forbidden, is transgression; Ibn ʿAbbas reports similarly. NAHHAS (أبو إسحاق): Abu Ishaq prefers taking ولا يضار as a prohibition on the writer or witness causing harm, since the next clause calls such conduct sinful. NAHHAS (المفضل): Al-Mufaddal reports al-Aʿmash reading ولا يضار with kasra on rāʾ; kasra or fatḥa resolves the meeting of two sukūns, with fatḥa lighter. NAHHAS (عمر بن الخطاب وابن عباس وابن أبي إسحاق): Umar, Ibn Abbas, and Ibn Abi Ishaq read ولا يضارر with kasra on the first rāʾ. THALABI (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says the command originally bound writers and witnesses, then the prohibition on harming them abrogated it. THALABI (author): An acceptable witness must meet ten conditions: freedom, adulthood, Islam, uprightness, knowledge of the matter, no personal gain or avoidance of harm, few errors, proper social conduct, no excessive leniency, and no adverse testimony from his slave. THALABI (author): The prohibition has assimilated doubled rāʾ letters from yudār ir, with fatḥa resolving the two adjacent sukūns. THALABI (عمر وأبي وابن مسعود ومجاهد): Umar, Ubayy, Ibn Masʿud, and Mujahid read ولا يضارر with the doubled consonants made explicit, supporting the interpretation that the writer or witness is not to be harmed. THALABI (أبو جعفر): Abu Jaʿfar reads ولا يضار in a light, jussive form with one rāʾ. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan reads ولا يضار with a doubled rāʾ and kasra. MAWARDI-FULL (الضحاك): The command is abrogated by the later command not to harm a scribe or witness. MAWARDI-FULL (طاووس والحسن وقتادة): Harming a scribe or witness includes writing terms not dictated or testifying to what was not witnessed. MAWARDI-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد وعطاء): Harming a scribe or witness includes preventing a scribe from writing or a witness from testifying. WAHIDI-BASIT (الفراء): Al-Farrāʾ regards writing and witnesses as recommendation and permission like the commands in 5:2 and 62:10: documenting is good but leaving it is harmless. | mentions 5:2, 62:10 JISHUMI (أبو جعفر): Abu Jaʿfar reads يضار in the jussive with a light, ungeminated rāʾ. JISHUMI (الحسن): Al-Hasan reads يضار with a kasra and a geminated rāʾ. JISHUMI (الحسن، وقتادة، وابن زيد): The kasra reading of يضارر is associated with al-Hasan, Qatada, and Ibn Zayd. JISHUMI (author): The forbidden conduct is understood as harming the writer and witness or doing what was prohibited and disobeying what was commanded; it is departure from God’s obedience. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Suspicion bars an enemy's testimony against an enemy and testimony for one's parents or children; it also bars a witness whose testimony gains benefit or averts harm for himself. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Examples of self-interest are an heir testifying against his benefactor's killer and a defendant accusing a witness of wrongdoing to ward off harm. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عمر بن الخطاب وابن مسعود ومجاهد): They read the verb with the letters separated and the first rāʾ fatḥa, meaning a claimant may initiate harm to the scribe or witness; al-Ṭabarī reports and explains this reading accordingly. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عكرمة): ʿIkrima reads the first rāʾ with kasra and makes “scribe” and “witness” accusative, so that the rights-holder is forbidden to begin harming them. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن محيصن): Ibn Muḥayṣin reads the geminated verb with rafʿ; after Ibn Mujāhid questions it, Abū al-Fatḥ explains it as a negative statement meaning the scribe ought not to be harmed, supported by poetry. Ibn ʿAṭiyya finds it close to the earlier analysis. TABRISI (author): One analysis derives لا يضار from doubled ر, with the writer and witness forbidden to depart from the truth. TABRISI (author): The first interpretation of لا يضار is clearer; Abū Jaʿfar's doubled quiescent rāʾ is unusual and explained by treating connected recitation like pause. TABRISI (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says writing was originally obligatory but was abrogated by the ban on harming a scribe or witness. TABRISI (author): The verse threatens that harming a scribe or witness in writing or testimony is a departure from God's commands; fear God, who teaches what is needed and knows all. TABRISI (أبو جعفر): Abū Jaʿfar reads لا يضار with a doubled, quiescent rāʾ; the remaining readers use the doubled rāʾ in the accusative form. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Abu Jaʿfar reads yuḍār with a light ra and sukun. RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the reading that writers and witnesses must not harm the claimant, while the opposing reading points to the plural address and the ensuing plural verb. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (author): Another view says the writer’s duty was obligatory but later abrogated by the prohibition on harming writers and witnesses. | mentions 2:282 QURTUBI-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): They say the order to write was abrogated by the prohibition against harming a writer or witness; al-Qurṭubī calls this remote because a universal obligation was never established and paid document-writing is permitted. NASAFI-FULL (author): Harming the scribe or witnesses is sinful conduct; fear God in this duty. BURHAN (author): The author lists Qur’anic denunciations as signs that an act is forbidden, including calling it injustice, wrongful appropriation, sin, or fisq, as in the ban on harming scribes and witnesses. NASHR (author): The preceding discussion gives a lightened r in يضار and reports Abū Jaʿfar's sukūn there, with disagreement transmitted from him. DURR-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Witness a sale whether deferred or immediate; harming the scribe or witness in violation of the command is disobedience, and one must fear God. ELMALILI (author): Hamza also reads the relevant form with rāʾ in the nominative, whereas readings other than Asim's use the nominative for wa-la yudārra. IBNASHUR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk, with a report from ʿAṭāʾ, regards the scribe’s duty as abrogated by the ban on harming a scribe or witness; the author objects that writing is not ordinarily harm except in rare cases such as great distance. | mentions 2:282 IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو حنيفة): The author applies the earlier disagreement about scribes: accepting the request to bear witness becomes individual when designated, and giving testimony is individually obligatory if it causes no bodily or financial harm; Abū Ḥanīfa makes performance communal unless uniquely required, subject to court integrity, proximity, admissibility, and a claimant’s request. QIRAAT-ER (author): Abu Jaʿfar and Yaʿqub quiesce the final rāʾ in yuḍār; the source treats it as phonetic, with the same morphological analysis."}, {"id": "2:282/q67/p2", "position": "Scribes and witnesses must not harm parties through distortion or refusal", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the scribe harms people by changing what was dictated, while a witness harms them by altering testimony and thereby voiding their rights. TAB-FULL (عطاء): ʿAṭāʾ offers another interpretation: the writer and witness must not be harmed by having to withhold the knowledge or testimony they possess. TAB-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ reports that after the duty not to refuse writing was revealed, people pressured busy scribes and witnesses despite being able to find others; this harassment occasioned the prohibition on harming them. IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Harming a witness includes concealing or distorting testimony. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan makes writing obligatory when refusing would harm the creditor because no other writer is available, but optional when another can do it. THALABI (الربيع بن أنس): Al-Rabiʿ ibn Anas reports that people sometimes pressured busy writers and witnesses by invoking the command, 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
