<<chunk 34, part 2 of 0..5>>
ading, supported by ʿUmar's unassimilated reading: the opening addresses transaction parties, not writers and witnesses, and the warning fits parties forbidden to cause harm. SAMIN-DURR (author): On the passive reading, no one may harm the scribe or witness; its context concerns those receiving the writing and testimony, and the consequence would otherwise address two people. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): Another interpretation forbids burdening or harming the writer and witness: a person summons them, and they explain that they are occupied, but he insists that they were commanded to answer; Ibn Abbas says the caller may not harm them. Similar views are attributed to many early authorities. DURR-FULL (الربيع): When people pressed a busy scribe to write despite other available scribes, God revealed the prohibition against harming a scribe or witness. ITQAN (author): The verse can mean that the scribe and witness must not wrong the claimant, or that the claimant must not harm them by imposing undue work or coercing them. ALUSI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbas’s uncontracted reading with fatha supports the passive interpretation, forbidding others to harm the scribe or witness. ALUSI-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabiʿ reports that requesters sometimes forced busy scribes to write and would not let them decline; this occasion explains the command not to harm them. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Harm includes parties burdening a scribe or witness with hardship, loss, or exposure to punishment, and witnesses causing a party to lose a right or suffer the burden of answering."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q68", "question": "How is يضار read and analyzed?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q68/p1", "position": "The unassimilated or unusual vocalizations clarify the form", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): The form radd stays unassimilated in faʿala because quiescing the ending would still leave gemination, while the first radical is inherently quiescent. SIBAWAYH (author): Forms such as ṭabb and khāf follow the three-letter verbal pattern; the lack of an unassimilated tabbab confirms that faʿal is assimilated. SIBAWAYH (قوم): Some speakers preserve the unassimilated faʿil form, as in ḍafaf, because this pattern can be sound in the qult class. SIBAWAYH (author): Tāʾ and dāl assimilate to one another because they share a place and differ mainly in voicing; unassimilated speech is possible but laborious. TAB-FULL (author): On the first interpretation, the underlying form is ولا يضارر; the two identical rāʾ letters assimilate, with fatḥa used despite the jussive because it is the lightest vowel. TAB-FULL (عمر): ʿUmar is reported to have read the phrase with an unassimilated doubled rāʾ, ولا يضارر. NAHHAS (المفضل): Al-Mufaddal reports al-Aʿmash reading ولا يضار with kasra on rāʾ; kasra or fatḥa resolves the meeting of two sukūns, with fatḥa lighter. NAHHAS (عمر بن الخطاب وابن عباس وابن أبي إسحاق): Umar, Ibn Abbas, and Ibn Abi Ishaq read ولا يضارر with kasra on the first rāʾ. NAHHAS (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud reads ولا يضارر with fatḥa on the first rāʾ; both readings explain the text and do not replace the codex reading. THALABI (author): The prohibition has assimilated doubled rāʾ letters from yudār ir, with fatḥa resolving the two adjacent sukūns. THALABI (أبو جعفر): Abu Jaʿfar reads ولا يضار in a light, jussive form with one rāʾ. THALABI (الحسن): Al-Hasan reads ولا يضار with a doubled rāʾ and kasra. JISHUMI (أبو جعفر): Abu Jaʿfar reads يضار in the jussive with a light, ungeminated rāʾ. JISHUMI (الحسن): Al-Hasan reads يضار with a kasra and a geminated rāʾ. JISHUMI (الحسن، وقتادة، وابن زيد): The kasra reading of يضارر is associated with al-Hasan, Qatada, and Ibn Zayd. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عمر بن الخطاب وابن مسعود ومجاهد): They read the verb with the letters separated and the first rāʾ fatḥa, meaning a claimant may initiate harm to the scribe or witness; al-Ṭabarī reports and explains this reading accordingly. IBNATIYYA-FULL (أبو جعفر بن القعقاع وعمرو بن عبيد): They read the geminated rāʾ with sukūn in the jussive; Abū al-Fatḥ calls it questionable but explains it as treating connected speech like a pause. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عكرمة): ʿIkrima reads the first rāʾ with kasra and makes “scribe” and “witness” accusative, so that the rights-holder is forbidden to begin harming them. TABRISI (author): The first interpretation of لا يضار is clearer; Abū Jaʿfar's doubled quiescent rāʾ is unusual and explained by treating connected recitation like pause. TABRISI (أبو جعفر): Abū Jaʿfar reads لا يضار with a doubled, quiescent rāʾ; the remaining readers use the doubled rāʾ in the accusative form. RAZI-FULL (عمر وابن عباس): The ambiguity comes from assimilation in يضارر: the subject may inflict harm or suffer it; Umar’s kasra and Ibn ʿAbbas’s fatḥa with explicit pronunciation preserve both readings. | mentions 2:233 ABUHAYYAN-FULL (عمر، ابن عباس، مجاهد، ابن أبي إسحاق): Their reading is reported with the first rāʾ unassimilated and either kasra or fatḥa; unassimilated pronunciation is Ḥijāzī and assimilation Tamīmī. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن القعقاع، عمرو بن عبيد، عكرمة، ابن محيصن): Their variants include a jussive rāʾ, an unassimilated verb with accusative kātiban, and a raised doubled rāʾ used as a negative form that strengthens the prohibition. SAMIN-DURR (أبو جعفر وعمرو بن عبيد): Abu Jaʿfar and ʿAmr b. ʿUbayd read the doubled rāʾ sākin in connected speech; the author notes the three-consonant cluster is weak, tolerated by lengthening and by analogy to pause. SAMIN-DURR (عكرمة): ʿIkrima reads the form with both rāʾs separated and the first kasra; the implied subject is the rights-holder, who must not coerce the scribe or witness. SAMIN-DURR (عكرمة): In a report from Miqsam, ʿIkrima reads doubled rāʾ with kasra, reflecting the original meeting of two sukūns. NASHR (ابن كثير والبصريان): Ibn Kathir and the two Basrans read the rāʾ with ḍamma; the other readers use fatḥa. The author gives no semantic distinction here. NASHR (أبو جعفر): Abu Jaʿfar has two transmitted forms: some routes lighten and silence the rāʾ, while other routes double it with fatḥa; all retain the alif’s lengthening at the meeting of two sukūns. NASHR (author): The preceding discussion gives a lightened r in يضار and reports Abū Jaʿfar's sukūn there, with disagreement transmitted from him. ITQAN (جمال الدين بن مالك): Ibn Malik says the Quran is in Hijazi speech except a few Tamimi forms, including assimilation of jussive verbs; Hijazi unassimilated forms are common, as in وليملل. | mentions 11:87, 20:81 ELMALILI (author): Hamza also reads the relevant form with rāʾ in the nominative, whereas readings other than Asim's use the nominative for wa-la yudārra. QIRAAT-ER (author): Abu Jaʿfar and Yaʿqub quiesce the final rāʾ in yuḍār; the source treats it as phonetic, with the same morphological analysis."}, {"id": "2:282/q68/p2", "position": "The active form forbids scribes and witnesses to wrong parties", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): On the active reading, the underlying form is yudārir with kasra; the writer and witness are the agents. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Ḍārr may be active or passive; ʿUmar’s and Ibn ʿAbbās’s readings clarify it. The ban covers refusing, falsifying, adding, or omitting testimony, or harming witnesses through coercion, unpaid work, and travel costs. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Lā yuḍārr has two readings: scribes and witnesses must not refuse, distort, or alter testimony, or others must not harm them by disrupting duties, demanding extra travel, or withholding their fees and expenses. NASAFI-FULL (عمر): ʿUmar reads يضارر in the active voice; Ibn ʿAbbās reads يضار in the passive. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reads the passive form ولا يضار, while ʿUmar's active form is ولا يضارر. NASAFI-FULL (author): The active reading forbids a scribe or witness to refuse, distort, add, or omit; the passive forbids burdening them, rushing them from duties, withholding the scribe's fee, or making a witness bear travel costs. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The warning addresses writer and witness under an active reading, the parties under the passive reading, or everyone regarding all commands and prohibitions. SAMIN-DURR (عمر وابن عباس ومجاهد وابن أبي إسحاق): Al-Dani reports these authorities reading the first rāʾ with kasra, supporting the active interpretation. BURSEVI (author): If active, the prohibition bars a scribe from refusing or altering the document and a witness from withholding testimony; if passive, it bars others from harming them while occupied or withholding their fee. ALUSI-FULL (author): If active, the verse forbids witnesses and scribes to refuse, distort, add, or subtract; if passive, it forbids burdening them, withholding the fee, or requiring costly travel. ALUSI-FULL (author): Al-Alusi rejects making the صيغة carry both active and passive meanings at once. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The verb yaḍārr can be active or passive, allowing the ban to cover either scribes and witnesses harming the parties or the parties harming them; the wording deliberately carries both compatible rules. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): The doubled form يُضَارّ can be read as active or passive; spelling the consonant without assimilation would distinguish the two forms. | mentions 8:13, 5:54 SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The undiacritized form يُضارّ can be active or passive; spelling the assimilated consonant separately would distinguish يُضارِر from يُضارَر. | mentions 8:13, 2:217"}, {"id": "2:282/q68/p3", "position": "Assimilation permits active and passive analyses of yuḍārr.", "reasons": "FARRA (author): ولا يضار الكاتب والشاهد means do not summon either while occupied. ABDURRAZZAQ (عمر): Ikrima reports Umar reciting the verb with a doubled r, as ‘ولا يضارر كاتب ولا شهيد.’ AKHFASH (author): ولا يضار can be parsed as a prohibition or as an indicative statement; compare لا تضار والدة بولدها, though that form was not read in the indicative. | mention
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
