<<chunk 34, part 1 of 0..5>>
even when alternatives existed, so the verse prohibited harming them. WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan limits the duty to cases where no other scribe is available, because refusal would harm the creditor. WAHIDI-BASIT (طاوس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): One reading prohibits harming a scribe or witness through falsifying or altering the record, bearing false testimony, or refusing to testify; the active form has the writer and witness as agents. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): The ban on harming a scribe or witness forbids altering records, false testimony, and refusing to testify; doing so is sinful. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): A just scribe writes without altering amount or term and must not refuse when asked; this was first obligatory for writer and witness, then abrogated by the prohibition on harming them. JISHUMI (author): Some say the command that a scribe not refuse was abrogated by the instruction not to harm a scribe or witness; the adopted practice is the first view, communal obligation. JISHUMI (author): On the active reading, the underlying form is yudārir with kasra; the writer and witness are the agents. JISHUMI (عطاء وطاووس والحسن وقتادة وابن زيد): The writer must not be harmed by being forbidden to write or made to add or subtract from what was dictated; the witness must not be made to refuse or testify to what he does not know. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Ḍārr may be active or passive; ʿUmar’s and Ibn ʿAbbās’s readings clarify it. The ban covers refusing, falsifying, adding, or omitting testimony, or harming witnesses through coercion, unpaid work, and travel costs. IBNATIYYA-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabīʿ and al-Ḍaḥḥāk, as transmitted by al-Mahdawī, say the prohibition on a scribe refusing was abrogated by the command not to cause harm in 2:282. | mentions 2:282 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الحسن وقتادة وطاوس وابن زيد): They say “do not harm a scribe or witness” prohibits a writer from adding to or subtracting from what was dictated and a witness from altering testimony; Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also understand it to prohibit their refusal. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): If harm means falsification by a writer or witness, fisq is the legal commission of grave sins and invalidating rights; if it means mistreatment or refusal, fisq means departing from what is right, though disobeying God's command approaches the legal sense too. TABRISI (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says refusal is obligatory to avoid only when there is no alternative scribe and refusal would harm the creditor; otherwise the scribe has latitude. TABRISI (مجاهد وعطاء وسعيد بن جبير): One reported view says summoned witnesses must not refuse to give testimony they know without doubt, provided doing so causes them no harm. IBNJAWZI-ZAD (عطاء): A third view from ʿAta and others says the harm is the scribe refusing to write or the witness refusing to testify. RAZI-FULL (أكثر المفسرين والحسن وطاوس وقتادة): Most exegetes, al-Hasan, Tawus, and Qatada read ولا يضار as forbidding the writer or witness from harming the rights-holder through falsification, omission, or ineffective testimony. QURTUBI-FULL (الحسن): He makes writing obligatory only where refusal would harm the creditor because no substitute writer is available; otherwise the writer has latitude. NASAFI-FULL (عمر): ʿUmar reads يضارر in the active voice; Ibn ʿAbbās reads يضار in the passive. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās reads the passive form ولا يضار, while ʿUmar's active form is ولا يضارر. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الربيع والضحاك): Al-Rabīʿ and al-Ḍaḥḥāk say the ban on a scribe refusing was abrogated by the later ban on harming a scribe or witness. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): An active reading forbids a writer altering the document or a witness concealing, changing, or withholding testimony; al-Zajjāj prefers this. Ibn ʿAbbās, Mujāhid, and ʿAṭāʾ also explain harm as refusing with excuses about being busy. SAMIN-DURR (الزجاج): On the active reading, the scribe and witness are forbidden to harm the beneficiary by altering or withholding documentation; al-Zajjaj prefers it because such conduct is clearly sinful. SAMIN-DURR (ابن عباس ومجاهد وطاووس): Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, and Tawus are reported to explain the active reading as the scribe or witness harming the party entitled to the record. BURHAN (author): The stronger reading is that a scribe or witness must not be harmed, including by concealing the writing or testimony; another reading forbids callers from burdening them at harmful times. DURR-FULL (الضحاك): Al-Dahhak says the obligation not to refuse was abrogated by the prohibition on harming a scribe or witness. BURSEVI (author): If active, the prohibition bars a scribe from refusing or altering the document and a witness from withholding testimony; if passive, it bars others from harming them while occupied or withholding their fee. ALUSI-FULL (عمر): Umar’s uncontracted reading with kasra supports the active interpretation of the prohibition against harming a scribe or witness. ELMALILI (author): The command not to harm a scribe or witness can mean they must not harm rights-holders by refusing a request or falsifying or altering the writing or testimony. ELMALILI (author): Alternatively, on the passive reading, scribes and witnesses themselves must not be harmed by excessive demands, interruption of important work, or denial of a scribe’s fee. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR (author): Parties must not inconvenience or harm scribes and witnesses, even with unnecessary calls, pressure, or threats to distort the record; the verse forbids such conduct and calls them to fear God. SAMARRAI-LAMASAT-HALAQAT (author): The verse forbids writers and witnesses from harming others by suppressing, refusing, or distorting testimony, and forbids others from coercing them into the same harms."}, {"id": "2:282/q67/p3", "position": "The wording encompasses harm in both directions", "reasons": "FARRA (author): ولا يضار الكاتب والشاهد means do not summon either while occupied. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (مجاهد والكلبي): Mujāhid and al-Kalbī explain لا يضار as not bothering a writer by distracting him from his trade or work. NAHHAS (ابن مسعود): Ibn Masʿud reads ولا يضارر with fatḥa on the first rāʾ; both readings explain the text and do not replace the codex reading. MAWARDI-FULL (author): A just scribe must neither add a term to harm the debtor nor omit one to harm the creditor. WAHIDI-BASIT (الضحاك): Al-Ḍaḥḥāk says the command initially imposed an obligation on scribe and witness, later abrogated by the ban on harming either one. JISHUMI (author): The scribe records the debt or sale between the parties with fairness, neither adding nor subtracting nor harming either without their knowledge. JISHUMI (author): The verse prescribes fair drafting of contract terms and documents and forbids harming either party. BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He says the writer's and witness's duties were binding, then abrogated by the ban on harming either. IBNATIYYA-FULL (ابن عباس ومجاهد والضحاك والسدي وطاوس): They say a claimant harms a scribe or witness by demanding work when that person is busy or excused, then shaming him for refusing; the word's reciprocal sense encompasses these readings and the preceding ones. TABRISI (author): A just scribe records the debt or sale accurately, without changing its terms, amount, or anything that harms either party without consent. RAZI-FULL (عمر وابن عباس): The ambiguity comes from assimilation in يضارر: the subject may inflict harm or suffer it; Umar’s kasra and Ibn ʿAbbas’s fatḥa with explicit pronunciation preserve both readings. | mentions 2:233 QURTUBI-FULL (author): The reciprocal form encompasses both kinds of harm: dishonest additions and omissions wrongfully affect people and property, while imposing on busy witnesses violates God's command. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Lā yuḍārr has two readings: scribes and witnesses must not refuse, distort, or alter testimony, or others must not harm them by disrupting duties, demanding extra travel, or withholding their fees and expenses. BIQAI-FULL (author): The prohibition on harming a scribe or witness covers both causing harm and suffering harm; the author says both readings make sense. ITQAN (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba’s first variation type changes case or vowel without changing meaning or form, illustrated by two readings of ولا يضار كاتب. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The verb yaḍārr can be active or passive, allowing the ban to cover either scribes and witnesses harming the parties or the parties harming them; the wording deliberately carries both compatible rules. ASAD-NOTES (author): A scribe or witness must not be harmed by being held responsible for the contract’s consequences or either party’s failure to perform. SAMARRAI-ASRAR-MUH (author): The verse forbids both a writer or witness harming others by withholding or distorting testimony and others pressuring them into changing or withholding it."}, {"id": "2:282/q67/p4", "position": "Parties must not burden or mistreat scribes and witnesses", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid says a requester harms a busy scribe or witness by insisting “fear God, you were commanded” when other people can be found; they need not interrupt their work or feel pressured. MAWARDI-FULL (عكرمة والضحاك والسدي والربيع): Harming them may mean summoning a busy, excused scribe or witness. WAHIDI-BASIT (ابن مسعود وعطاء ومجاهد): Ibn Masʿūd, ʿAṭāʾ, and Mujāhid instead say not to summon a busy scribe or witness when attending would harm him; on this reading the verb is passive. JISHUMI (ابن مسعود ومجاهد): Ibn Masʿud and Mujahid are associated with the fatḥa reading, meaning a witness must not be summoned while occupied in order to harm him. JISHUMI (author): On the passive reading, the writer and witness are the objects of harm. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس، مجاهد، طاووس، الضحاك، السدي): Under the passive reading, they say others must not harm the writer or witness by burdening them, disrupting their work, or making unreasonable demands. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī prefers the passive re
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
