<<chunk 34, part 4 of 0..5>>
 notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q71/p1", "position": "The teaching clause's relation to piety is disputed.", "reasons": "TABRISI (author): The verse threatens that harming a scribe or witness in writing or testimony is a departure from God's commands; fear God, who teaches what is needed and knows all. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Doing harm or another prohibited act is disobedience; fear God in violations, and He teaches laws containing people's welfare. NASAFI-FULL (author): Causing such harm is sinful conduct; fear God in this duty, and God teaches the laws of religion without forgetfulness or deficiency. DURR-FULL (النبي): The Prophet calls it a source of piety to learn from what one knows what one does not know; little benefit from known knowledge makes people neglect further learning. BURSEVI (author): Violating the ban on harm is disobedience; believers should fear God in all His commands and prohibitions, and He teaches rulings that serve their interests and knows their conduct. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The command to fear God presents piety as the basis of good conduct and abstention from wrongdoing; the teaching clause recalls Islam’s gift of knowledge of law and the order of life, and its present tense suggests its continuance. TABATABAI (author): The command to fear God concerns obeying the instructions in the verse; “God teaches you” begins a separate statement of favor, teaching religious rules and lawful and unlawful matters. | mentions 4:176"}, {"id": "2:282/q71/p2", "position": "Piety brings further divine instruction", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Bikum implies “a state of fisq upon you”; the close of the verse admonishes and recounts God's favor, and another interpretation promises that piety teaches a person what is good. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “God teaches you” is an independent sentence reminding of the blessing of knowledge; taking it as circumstantial is very weak because imperfect circumstantial verbs ordinarily do not take this waw. BURHAN (بعض الناس): Some infer that piety causes divine teaching from the juxtaposition of the two clauses. BURHAN (المحققون): The investigators deny that the verse grammatically makes piety a cause of teaching: there is waw, not fa or a conditional construction, so the clauses are associated rather than causally linked. | mentions 11:123 BIQAI-FULL (author): The closing call to fear God addresses the stratagems by which traders pursue private advantage, while promising teaching and warning of threat. ALUSI-FULL (author): Repeating the divine name in three successive independent clauses is laudable when it magnifies the subject; here the clauses exhort piety, promise divine instruction, and glorify God’s knowledge. TABATABAI (author): Although piety can bring divine teaching elsewhere, the verse does not establish that causal rule: the conjunction and the passage’s structure do not support it."}, {"id": "2:282/q71/p3", "position": "The verse joins independent clauses without asserting causation", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘God teaches you’ is most likely an independent sentence; Abu al-Baqa also allows a circumstantial clause, but the author objects that a positive present verb does not directly follow the circumstantial wāw. ITQAN (author): The resumptive wāw introduces an independent clause in examples including “fear God, and God teaches you”; if it coordinated verbs, the case of نقر and the following verbs would change. | mentions 2:185, 40:33 TABATABAI (author): Repeating God’s name shows that “God teaches you” is independent; the final name emphasizes the reason for His instruction, that He knows everything."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q72", "question": "What does ويعلمكم الله promise?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q72/p1", "position": "God teaches legal rules and guidance", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (author): God teaches by clarifying the rules so people can act on them. RAZI-FULL (author): God teaches people guidance and safeguards for worldly dealings as well as religious guidance; His knowledge encompasses the interests of both lives. BAYDAWI-FULL (author): Doing harm or another prohibited act is disobedience; fear God in violations, and He teaches laws containing people's welfare. NASAFI-FULL (author): Causing such harm is sinful conduct; fear God in this duty, and God teaches the laws of religion without forgetfulness or deficiency. NASAFI-FULL (author): God teaches the laws of religion and knows everything without forgetfulness or deficiency. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): Al-Harali takes the enduring form teaches to promise continued divine instruction beyond what people can reach through this guidance alone. BURSEVI (author): God teaches transaction rules out of mercy to prevent injustice, quarrels, resentment, and worldly distress; this shows that religious obligations also bring purification and blessing. | mentions 5:6 ALUSI-FULL (author): Repeating the divine name in three successive independent clauses is laudable when it magnifies the subject; here the clauses exhort piety, promise divine instruction, and glorify God’s knowledge. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): On the first reading, as God taught him means writing in exact correspondence with divine instruction, not approximately; kāf is an adverbial cognate or describes an omitted verbal noun, and mā is relative. TABATABAI (author): The command to fear God concerns obeying the instructions in the verse; “God teaches you” begins a separate statement of favor, teaching religious rules and lawful and unlawful matters. | mentions 4:176 TABATABAI (author): Repeating God’s name shows that “God teaches you” is independent; the final name emphasizes the reason for His instruction, that He knows everything."}, {"id": "2:282/q72/p2", "position": "God instructs people in rules that protect their interests.", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “God teaches you” is an independent sentence reminding of the blessing of knowledge; taking it as circumstantial is very weak because imperfect circumstantial verbs ordinarily do not take this waw. SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘God teaches you’ is most likely an independent sentence; Abu al-Baqa also allows a circumstantial clause, but the author objects that a positive present verb does not directly follow the circumstantial wāw. ITQAN (author): The resumptive wāw introduces an independent clause in examples including “fear God, and God teaches you”; if it coordinated verbs, the case of نقر and the following verbs would change. | mentions 2:185, 40:33 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Some take the conjunction in wayuʿallimukumu Allāh causally, as meaning that God teaches because of piety; the author rejects treating this as a special grammatical meaning of wāw."}, {"id": "2:282/q72/p3", "position": "God gives further knowledge to those who practice and fear Him", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): God teaches people what benefits them in religious and worldly affairs, which they did not know. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Fearing God means keeping watch, following His commands, and leaving His prohibitions; the promise that God teaches those who fear Him is compared with the discernment of 8:29 and light from 57:28. | mentions 8:29, 57:28 BIQAI-FULL (author): The promise that God teaches those who fear Him supports the preceding point about expanded understanding of Qur'anic knowledge. | mentions 2:282"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q73", "question": "What does والله بكل شيء عليم add?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q73/p1", "position": "God's comprehensive knowledge grounds the admonition.", "reasons": "MUQATIL (author): Wronging a scribe or witness is sinful; God commands the parties to fear Him and knows all their deeds. TAB-FULL (author): God knows deeds and other matters, records people's actions, and will repay them. IBNABIHATIM (سعيد بن جبير): God knows what people do. TABRISI (author): The verse threatens that harming a scribe or witness in writing or testimony is a departure from God's commands; fear God, who teaches what is needed and knows all. NASAFI-FULL (author): God teaches the laws of religion and knows everything without forgetfulness or deficiency. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): God knows the realities, interests, and consequences of all things; nothing is hidden from His knowledge, which encompasses all beings. BURSEVI (author): God knows hidden thoughts and secrets and rewards people according to the sincerity and purity of their intentions; blessed is the person who purifies his character and seeks the unseen. ALUSI-FULL (author): God knows every matter and will repay people for their conduct. ELMALILI (author): Because God knows everything, believers should obey commands, avoid prohibitions, trust His promise, honor Him, and secure their dealings; piety is the foundation of that security. TABATABAI (author): Repeating God’s name shows that “God teaches you” is independent; the final name emphasizes the reason for His instruction, that He knows everything."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q74", "question": "Why is الله repeated at the close?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q74/p1", "position": "Repetition magnifies God and separates exhortation, promise, and knowledge", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL (author): The repeated name of God in three clauses signals their independence: exhortation to piety, a promise of favor, and magnification greater than a pronoun would provide. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): God's knowledge encompasses all and signals recompense; repeating “God” makes three independent statements: command to piety, reminder of grace, and promise or threat. BURHAN (author): The first reason to repeat an explicit noun instead of using a pronoun is to magnify or honor it; examples include repeated mention of God, the Quran's dawn recitation, and Zecharia
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
