<<chunk 34, part 5 of 0..5>>
h. ALUSI-FULL (author): Repeating the divine name in three successive independent clauses is laudable when it magnifies the subject; here the clauses exhort piety, promise divine instruction, and glorify God’s knowledge. TABATABAI (author): Repeating God’s name shows that “God teaches you” is independent; the final name emphasizes the reason for His instruction, that He knows everything."}, {"id": "2:282/q74/p2", "position": "Repeating Allah marks three independent, weighty clauses.", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): Stating the one on whom reliance is placed strengthens the addressee's motive; repeating God's name in the next clause reinforces the appeal. BURHAN (author): The verse's repeated explicit name of God exemplifies the broader preference for restating a noun when the intervening material is long or a new verse begins. | mentions 2:143, 24:35, 24:37 ITQAN (author): Repeating the explicit name can signal exaltation; al-Baqara 2:282 exemplifies this through repeated mention of Allah. | mentions 58:22, 17:78, 7:26"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q75", "question": "When and how was this verse revealed?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q75/p1", "position": "It is the Qur'an's longest verse", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (ناس): Some hold that the miraculous measure is an entire surah or the longest verse. BAQILLANI (author): He holds both proposed units—the surah and the longest verse—to be miraculous, because eloquence cannot be established in anything shorter. KASHSHAF-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the verse concerns salam: after usury was forbidden, advance sale for a guaranteed term was permitted and the longest verse revealed for it. NASAFI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says this concerns salam; after forbidding usury, God permitted a guaranteed advance sale for a known term and revealed the longest verse, requiring a term for salam. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): This is the longest verse in the Qur'an; Ibn Shihab says he was told it was the latest Qur'anic verse revealed at the Throne. BURHAN (author): The debt verse is longest at 128 words and 540 letters; al-Duha then al-Fajr are shortest. He rejects مدهامتان and ثم نظر as shorter candidates based on their letter or word counts. ELMALILI (author): Called the Verse of Debt, this is the Quran's longest verse."}, {"id": "2:282/q75/p2", "position": "It was among the last revelations", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (سعيد بن المسيب): A report reaching Saʿid ibn al-Musayyab through Ibn Shihab calls the debt verse the latest Qur'anic revelation. QURTUBI-FULL (سعيد بن المسيب): He says he was told that the debt verse was the latest Quranic revelation at the Throne."}, {"id": "2:282/q75/p3", "position": "Its letter counts are distinctive", "reasons": "BURHAN (author): The verse on deferred debts contains thirty-three instances of the letter mīm. ITQAN (author): The debt verse is the Qur'an's only āya containing twenty-three kāf letters."}, {"id": "2:282/q75/p4", "position": "The verse is notable for length and late revelation reports.", "reasons": "ITQAN (أبو هريرة): A report in al-Mustadrak has the Prophet answer a question about kalālah by citing the summer verse; revelation during the Farewell Pilgrimage is classified as summer, including the start of al-Māʾidah, ‘Today I perfected,’ the debt verse, and al-Naṣr."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q76", "question": "What does the Adam-David written-gift report recount?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q76/p1", "position": "The report presents a written, witnessed gift from Adam to David.", "reasons": "IBNABIHATIM (رسول الله): A report from the Prophet says Adam denied gifting David forty years of his thousand-year lifespan; God produced the written record, witnessed by angels, proving the gift. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): A report says Adam first denied a written gift: God showed him David among his descendants, allowed forty years of Adam's thousand-year life to be added to David's sixty, recorded and witnessed the gift, then produced the document when Adam denied it; David received a hundred years and Adam completed his thousand. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن عباس): A Prophetic report says Adam first denied an agreement: God showed him his descendants, including David, gave David forty years from Adam's thousand-year lifespan, and documented and witnessed the gift; Adam later denied it until shown the record. A version says David lived one hundred and Adam completed one thousand. Ibn Kathir calls the report very strange and notes weakness in Ali ibn Zayd's narrations, though al-Hakim gives variants through Abu Hurayra. DURR-FULL (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A report says Adam was the first to deny: God drew future descendants from Adam's back, showed them to him, and Adam saw David shining and asked who he was."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
