<<chunk 35, part 0 of 0..1>>
{"id": "2:282/q77", "question": "How does the trust clause relate to this verse?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q77/p1", "position": "Trust allows optional omission of documentation", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الحسن والشعبي): Al-Ḥasan and al-Shaʿbī treat witnessing at sale as recommended or optional, citing the permission to rely on trust. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that witnessing every purchase and sale is an obligatory duty, because divine commands bind unless evidence shows a recommendation; he rejects abrogation by the trust clause. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الربيع): A second report from al-Rabiʿ says the trust provision in the next verse granted a concession. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Another view treats the writing rule as relaxed when parties trust one another, allowing them not to document or witness the transaction under the next verse. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (عامر): The trust provision grants permission for anyone who chooses to entrust the other party without documentation. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says that if the parties trust one another, neither witnessing nor writing is needed. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that people treated the trust clause as abrogating prior writing and witness requirements, making them a concession and mercy. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (غير عطاء): An unnamed authority other than ʿAṭāʾ says the trust clause abrogated writing and testimony. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (ابن زيد): Ibn Zayd says the trust clause replaced all documentation, witnesses, and pledges with reliance on the entrusted person's honesty. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الحسن): When asked whether every sale needs a witness, al-Ḥasan points to the instruction that a trusted party must return what was entrusted to him. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (عامر): ʿĀmir understands the trust clause as permission: whoever wishes may trust the other party without documentation. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says the trust clause abrogated the preceding command. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī says the trust clause abrogated what preceded it in the debt passage. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rules that recording a fixed-term debt and the scribe's duty to write are binding unless proof establishes recommendation; the trust exception applies when writing or a scribe is unavailable, so it does not abrogate the ordinary rule. | mentions 2:283 TAB-FULL (author): Al-Ṭabarī rejects abrogation by the trust clause: a conditional concession does not cancel a rule that can coexist with it, just as travel ablution and expiation alternatives do not cancel their ordinary rules. | mentions 2:283, 4:43, 5:6, 4:92, 58:3 IBNABIHATIM (محمد بن إسحاق): Ibn Ishaq says the writing command was abrogated by the later clause allowing the entrusted debtor to discharge the trust. | mentions 2:283 IBNABIHATIM (الحسن): Al-Hasan says the command to witness sales was abrogated by the clause allowing trusted dealings; al-Shaʿbi reports similarly. | mentions 2:283 THALABI (الشعبي): The debt record, witnesses, and pledge were initially obligatory, then the trust clause abrogated that requirement. | mentions 2:283 THALABI (أبو سعيد الخدري): Abu Saʿid al-Khudri says the decision to witness depends on mutual trust, citing the following verse. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (آخرون): Others say writing, witnesses, or collateral were initially obligatory but were abrogated by the trust clause in 2:283, which permits leaving documentation when the parties trust each other. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (الحسن): Asked by al-Taymī, al-Ḥasan said the parties may witness or omit witnesses, citing the clause that some may trust others. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-BASIT (أبو عبيد): Abū ʿUbayd says scholars in the Ḥijāz and Iraq agree that sale witnesses are not mandatory and that buyers can choose; they treat the following trust clause as abrogating the obligation. | mentions 2:283 WAHIDI-WAJIZ (author): After prohibiting usury, God permits forward-credit sales and commands writing and witnessing deferred debts to protect property; the trust exception in 2:283 abrogates this command. | mentions 2:283 JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing rights. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Some consider writing obligatory, but most deem the command recommendatory; al-Shaʿbi says writing, witnessing, and pledging were obligatory then abrogated by the trust provision. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbi holds that writing, witnessing, and pledging were initially obligatory and that the instruction to fulfill a trusted deposit abrogated all three. | mentions 2:283 BAGHAWI-FULL (الضحاك): He considers witnessing a binding command for both small and large transactions, cash or credit; Abu Saʿid al-Khudri leaves it to mutual trust, while others call it recommended. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الربيع): Al-Rabīʿ says documentation was initially made obligatory by the command, then lightened by the trust exception in 2:283. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī, Ibn Jurayj, and Ibn Zayd report the view that “if one of you trusts another” abrogates the documentation command; a report attributes the position to Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The sound view is that witnessing makes a transaction prudent while mutual trust leaves room; no abrogation follows, because documentation is recommended as a precaution for rights people may waive, and 2:283 instructs debtors to repay when trusted. | mentions 2:283 IBNATIYYA-FULL (قوم): Some say witnessing is abrogated by the trust exception in 2:283; al-Mahdawī records this view and Makkī attributes it to Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī. | mentions 2:283 IBNJAWZI-ZAD (author): Among those who require it, most say the ruling remains, while others say it was abrogated by the trust verse at 2:283. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (الحسن والشعبي والحكم وابن عيينة): A group says documentation was once obligatory and was abrogated by the permission to rely on mutual trust in the following verse; al-Razi later rejects abrogation without proof. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (النحاس): Al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥakam, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Zayd are reported to say that the mutual-trust clause abrogated witnessing sales. | mentions 2:283 QURTUBI-FULL (الشعبي): He says people regarded the following clause about mutual trust as abrogating the order to write; Ibn Jurayj, Ibn Zayd, and a report from Abu Saʿid are similar. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (أبو سعيد الخدري وابن زيد والشعبي وابن جريج): They held that the trust clause abrogated the command to write; al-Rabīʿ instead says writing was first required and then eased by the trust clause. IBNKATHIR-FULL (أبو سعيد والشعبي والربيع بن أنس والحسن وابن جريج وابن زيد): They hold that writing transactions was initially obligatory, then abrogated by the option to trust one another and discharge the entrusted obligation in 2:283. | mentions 2:283 IBNKATHIR-FULL (الشعبي والحسن): They say the command to witness sales was abrogated by the option to trust one another and return the entrusted property in 2:283. | mentions 2:283 ALUSI-FULL (author): Writing the debt with its due date is more convenient and secure; most treat the instruction as recommended in view of the later trust exception. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī, Ibn Jurayj, and Ibn Zayd say the rule was abrogated by the later permission to rely on mutual trust; the author says he will refute this. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The author answers the argument from unwitnessed sales by limiting those cases to contexts of mutual trust and refers to the following trust provision; he also rejects Ibn ʿAṭiyya’s earlier rationale. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The majority, including Malik, Abu Hanifa, al-Shafiʿi, and Ahmad, treat writing as recommended; the trust exception in 2:283 completes that recommendation. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): He prefers obligation because commands normally bind and the verse reinforces this one; 2:283 is a specific permission when contracting parties trust each other, not a general repeal. | mentions 2:283"}, {"id": "2:282/q77/p2", "position": "The following trust clause relates to documentary requirements.", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī says witnessing is prudent, but leaving it is lawful and allowed. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (author): Accepting testimony is already included in the command to appoint two witnesses, so reading the later command as performance gives it a distinct legal function; concealing testimony is separately forbidden. | mentions 2:283 RAZI-FULL (الزجاج): Al-Zajjaj prefers the reading that writers and witnesses must not harm the claimant, while the opposing reading points to the plural address and the ensuing plural verb. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The command to witness is additional to writing: writing preserves the contract’s wording and conditions against forgetfulness; jurists call it remembrance of the right and also a contract. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The next verse gives pledge as the alternative when a writer cannot be found, without making unwritten testimony an intermediate option; thus a writer may also be one of the witnesses. | mentions 2:283 IBNASHUR-FULL (مجاهد): Mujāhid limits the invitation to giving testimony; the author notes his rationale that invitees are not truly witnesses until they have borne witness, but considers it weakened by the next verse’s ban on concealing testimony. | mentions 2:283"}, {"id": "2:282/q77/p3", "position": "Trust abro
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
