<<chunk 35, part 1 of 0..1>>
gates earlier documentary duties", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (الطبري): Al-Ṭabarī rejects abrogation: the pledge clause addresses inability to find a scribe and an unrequired pledge, a different case from writing and witnessing. | mentions 2:283, 4:43, 5:6 QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt verse is established, not abrogated, and writing, pledges, and witnesses are alternative means of securing debt; witnessing is recommended like pledging. | mentions 2:283"}]}
{"id": "2:282/q78", "question": "What overall guidance does the verse give?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q78/p1", "position": "The verse safeguards rights through honest records and testimony.", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author): Some say a later verse licensed leaving documentation; others say trust permits omission, while another view says writing deferred debt is obligatory to protect rights. | mentions 2:106 WAHIDI-BASIT (المفسرون): Exegetes reject the male-equivalence interpretation: women without a man still cannot testify, forgetting should be paired with its opposite, remembering, and equal male status would apply across all legal rulings. JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī reports that writing, witnessing, and pledging were once obligatory and were abrogated by the following verse’s allowance when parties trust each other; Jishumi prefers the view that writing is recommended as a means of securing rights. | mentions 2:283 TABRISI (علي بن إبراهيم بن هاشم): ʿAlī b. Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim's tafsīr counts five hundred legal rulings in al-Baqara and fifteen in this verse alone. RAZI-FULL (القفال): Al-Qaffal sees the verse’s unusually repeated instructions as deliberate emphasis: careful documentation preserves lawful wealth needed for charity and avoidance of forbidden gain. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عباس): He says the verse was revealed specifically about salam, prompted by the people of Medina, but by consensus it covers all deferred debt transactions. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن خويزمنداد): He says the verse contains thirty legal rulings. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās says the debt-document verse was revealed specifically about forward-sale transactions in Medina; consensus extends it to all debts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): After commands to spend in God's path and leave usury, this verse offers a lawful way to grow wealth and gives detailed rules for protecting it. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): “With justice” urges fairness toward both creditor and ward; the verse supports legal interdiction of a minor and transactions by a spendthrift under guardianship. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): The debt guidance cultivates trust in God and support from Him; the Prophet died practicing it, and the surah's final movement emphasizes faith and reliance on the King of Kings in jihad. BURSEVI (author): The verse’s detailed protection of people’s rights shows that safeguarding property is necessary; those who pursue truth are saved, while others stray. TABATABAI (author): The two verses contain nearly twenty legal rulings, including rules for debt and pledges; detailed legal debate belongs in jurisprudence, so he leaves it aside here."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q79", "question": "How does this passage fit its surah?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q79/p1", "position": "It coheres with the surah's movement from usury to lawful dealings.", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL (author): Razi identifies the debt-document verse as the third legal ruling discussed in this passage of the surah. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): After commands to spend in God's path and leave usury, this verse offers a lawful way to grow wealth and gives detailed rules for protecting it. BIQAI-FULL (author): Al-Baqara spans relations between God and people through religion, between people through transactions and conflicts, and within the self through faith and covenants. BIQAI-FULL (أبو الحسن الحرالي): The debt guidance cultivates trust in God and support from Him; the Prophet died practicing it, and the surah's final movement emphasizes faith and reliance on the King of Kings in jihad."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
