<<chunk 36, part 0 of 0..8>>
{"id": "2:282/q80", "question": "What grammatical background do the cited works supply?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q80/p1", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#809).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Tāʾ and dāl share a place and strong articulation; ṭāʾ may assimilate to dāl, but speakers can preserve its emphatic quality because it is audible. SIBAWAYH (author): Ṭāʾ, tāʾ, and dāl can assimilate into ḍād because its articulation approaches lām and the tooth roots; clarity is easier with its looser articulation. SIBAWAYH (author): Ḍād resists assimilation into ṣād, sīn, and zāy because its extended articulation acts as a barrier, much as shīn does. SIBAWAYH (author): Ṭāʾ, dāl, and tāʾ assimilate into shīn due to its extended articulation; the related dental group can also assimilate, though clear pronunciation is good. SIBAWAYH (author): Assimilation possible with a quiescent first consonant is also possible when it is moving, as with geminates; adjacent consonants within one word are heavier than those across a boundary. SIBAWAYH (author): In derived forms, proximity can prompt substitution or assimilation: ṣabara yields muṣṭabir or muṣbir, while forms such as muzdān and mismiʿ show related adjustments. SIBAWAYH (author): Before tāʾ, ẓāʾ can retain emphasis or assimilate after substitution with ṭāʾ; Sībawayh cites Zuhayr's yẓlim / yṭlim rhyme and prefers the regular assimilation direction. SIBAWAYH (author): The regular direction of assimilation has the second consonant follow the first; Sībawayh therefore regards muṭʿan and muṭlam as more analogical than reversed forms. SIBAWAYH (author): Dhāl before tāʾ becomes dāl in mudhakkir; the Qur'anic mudakkir exemplifies this, while *mudhdakkir is barred because the letters assimilate reciprocally when separated. | mentions 54:17 SIBAWAYH (author): Ḍād behaves like ṣād when combined with tāʾ: forms may show partial or complete assimilation, and the common word-internal pattern makes this stronger than across words. SIBAWAYH (بعض العرب): Some Arabs remove ṭāʾ's emphatic quality and make it like dāl when they fully assimilate it; assimilation also proceeds in the reverse direction to ṭāʾ. SIBAWAYH (author): Some speakers use ṭāʾ in muṭjaʿ; Sībawayh explains its assimilation through the combination of emphaticness, proximity, and frequent co-occurrence within a word. SIBAWAYH (author): With the inflectional suffix tāʾ, the clearest and best Arabic leaves the suffix unchanged; unlike the fixed augment in iftaʿala, it marks a grammatical person and is separable. SIBAWAYH (بعضهم): Some speakers nevertheless assimilate the inflectional tāʾ, saying ʿaddahu for ʿadattahu and naqadahu for naqdattahu by analogy with other forms. SIBAWAYH (author): Assimilation normally requires the first consonant to be quiescent; this blocks it in forms such as istaṭʿama, istaḍʿafa, and istadraka. SIBAWAYH (author): Hijazis preserve the two consonants in forms such as arدد, while Tamim assimilate them; inflection can move the letters in the latter pattern, unlike the relevant close-consonant forms. SIBAWAYH (author): Istādara, istaṭāra, and istaḍāʾa resist assimilation because their sīn is inherently quiescent and the following consonant is already moved; ikhtaṣamū and iqtatalū differ because their radicals are naturally moving. SIBAWAYH (author): Watad and waṭad avoid assimilation to prevent confusion with geminated roots and the combined loss of a weak radical; muḥtad likewise stays distinct because tāʾ may correspond to dāl. SIBAWAYH (author): The t-prefix assimilates in yatatawwaʿūn, yatadhakkarūn, and yatasammaʿūn; clear forms remain good Arabic because both consonants are moving. | mentions 7:131 SIBAWAYH (author): When initial consonants assimilate, an initial alif is added where needed to avoid starting with a cluster; Sībawayh gives commands such as iṭawwaʿ and idhkur. SIBAWAYH (author): Qur'anic forms support contraction of t-initial forms: fa-ddāraʾtum for fata-dāraʾtum, izzayyanat for tazayyanat, and iṭṭayyarna for taṭayyarna. | mentions 2:72, 10:24, 27:47 SIBAWAYH (author): When two t-prefixes meet, speakers may retain both or delete the second; Qur'anic examples show both retention and deletion, with the deletable consonant being the one subject to assimilation. | mentions 41:30, 32:16, 97:4, 3:143 SIBAWAYH (author): The present-tense t-prefix is not made quiescent and does not take a linking alif, since those features belong to commands and would blur the distinction from active verbs. SIBAWAYH (أهل الكوفة): Sībawayh reports a Kūfan reading that contracts tatadhakkarūn to tadhakkarūn; deleting the root dhāl as well would damage the word. SIBAWAYH (author): The altered dāl in forms such as mudhakkir is anomalous, resembling a speech error rather than a regular sound change. SIBAWAYH (author): The nasal sound of mīm helps speakers articulate adjacent strong consonants distinctly; blocking the nose makes mīm resemble the preceding consonant more closely. SIBAWAYH (author): Ṣād with sīn or zāy behaves like ṭāʾ with dāl or tāʾ; speakers may preserve or remove emphaticness, with its removal more apt before sīn. SIBAWAYH (author): The sibilants and dental stops assimilate across nearby tongue-tip places; Sībawayh cites Ibn Muqbil's verse for tāʾ assimilating into ṣād. SIBAWAYH (author): Some reciters pronounce lā yasmaʿūn for lā yatسمmaʿūn; Sībawayh treats the clearer form as good Arabic because the articulation places differ. | mentions 37:8 SIBAWAYH (author): Ẓāʾ, dhāl, and thāʾ form a related dental group and can assimilate among themselves or with nearby ṭāʾ, dāl, and tāʾ; clear articulation is often preferable. SIBAWAYH (author): Ṣād, sīn, and zāy resist assimilation into the less resonant dental stops because their sibilant sound is more perceptible; rāʾ likewise resists because of its trill."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p2", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#715).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): An alif inclines toward imāla when followed by kasra, drawing pronunciation toward yāʾ for ease. SIBAWAYH (author): In roots with underlying yāʾ, an open alif is inclined because it occupies the place of yāʾ or replaces it. SIBAWAYH (الفرزدق): Al-Farazdaq's verse with yashumm supports the yāʾ-directed pronunciation used as evidence for imāla. SIBAWAYH (author): In wāw roots, imāla follows because final wāw turns to yāʾ after three letters, whereas yāʾ does not turn to wāw; yāʾ is lighter. SIBAWAYH (author): Some preserve the wāw quality and avoid imāla in short three-letter wāw-root nouns such as qafā, ʿaṣā, and al-qaṭā. SIBAWAYH (author): Verb alifs from wāw roots incline consistently because the final consonant changes toward yāʾ across inflection; nouns do not undergo that same change. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Many speakers, including many Tamimis, leave open the alif of four-or-more-letter nouns from wāw roots. SIBAWAYH (author): An added final alif is often inclined because it behaves like the alif of a yāʾ-root. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Many speakers leave the feminine or other added final alif open, saying ḥublā and maʿzā. SIBAWAYH (author): Some Hijazis incline alif in weak-root forms when the first vowel of faʿaltu is kasra; ordinary speakers do not. SIBAWAYH (ابن أبي إسحاق): Ibn Abī Isḥāq reportedly heard Kathīr ʿAzzah say ṣāra; some recited khāfa with imāla, illustrating the restricted middle-wāw case. SIBAWAYH (author): Imāla is an articulatory approximation, like moving ṣād toward zāy in ṣadr to ease the tongue's movement. SIBAWAYH (author): With medial wāw, imāla is limited to forms beginning with kasra; qāma and dāra do not incline. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Some say māta while others say mittu; speakers who say ṣāra and khāfa also use this variation. SIBAWAYH (author): The alif in kiyāl and bayyāʿ is inclined because a preceding yāʾ functions like a kasra; many Arabs leave it open. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Speakers who do not incline kiyāl also leave open shaybān, Qays ʿAylān, and Ghaylān, while others incline them for the yāʾ. SIBAWAYH (author): In a genitive position, some incline alif as in bābihi and mālihi by analogy with kātib and sājid, but the imāla is weaker because the kasra is not fixed. SIBAWAYH (author): Some extend imāla to accusative zaydan by analogy with Ghaylān, but it is weaker; they do not incline ʿabdan or kaslān because those lack yāʾ. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Some incline qazḥan and ʿalaman by treating their kasra as though it were yāʾ, and use the same analogy for al-najjādain. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Speakers differ at pause: some keep imāla, while others open the alif because pausing removes the supporting kasra. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Some incline ʿimādan by analogy with imāla after kasra, while others keep ʿalaman and ʿimādan open without preceding yāʾ or kasra. SIBAWAYH (author): A single intervening mobile consonant does not block imāla from an initial kasra, as in ʿimād. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Some pause with bimālin min ʿindi llāh or li-Zaydin māl, analogizing to ʿimād; this is weaker than a connected kasra. SIBAWAYH (author): They do not say dhā māl this way because a medial alif resembles that of fāʿil; in ʿimādan the second alif follows the first in imāla. SIBAWAYH (author): The second alif in ʿimādan is inclined by the imāla of the first. SIBAWAYH (author): Two intervening consonants still permit imāla when the first is quiescent, since a sākin is a weak barrier. SIBAWAYH (أهل الحجاز): Hijazis do not apply imāla to the described forms such as sirbāl, shamāl, ʿimād, and kilāb. SIBAWAYH (author): No imāla occurs when the following vowel is fatḥa or ḍamma: fatḥa is closer to alif, while rounding toward wāw would change the letter. SIBAWAYH (author): Some incline the alif of as-siwidād because widād behaves like kilāb, a form that accepts imāla."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p3", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#103).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In conditional pairs, a
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
