<<chunk 36, part 1 of 0..8>>
n explicit كان makes the intended relation clear; after fa, a nominative predicate is more usual because the answer resumes as a new sentence. SIBAWAYH (author): In من لد شولا, شولا is accusative because it means a time; an omitted أن كانت supplies that temporal sense, though some allow genitive by broad usage. SIBAWAYH (author): Ellipsis is limited to particles and constructions where Arabs use it; one cannot extend a deletion pattern to every particle or verb by analogy. SIBAWAYH (author): In the poem فإن جزعا وإن إجمال صبر, إن is a shortened إما meaning either, not conditional إن: the fa and lack of a conditional answer support the parse, as in 47:4. | mentions 47:4 SIBAWAYH (author): Dropping ما from إما is poetic only; al-Namr ibn Tawlab’s verse illustrates it, and reading the same form as conditional إن requires a separately omitted verb. SIBAWAYH (author): Responses such as هلا خيرا or ألا خيرا use an omitted verb that would be spoken; a nominative is possible when a nominative-governing verb is understood. SIBAWAYH (author): In أو فرقا خيرا من حب, the accusative answers a question about an action and implies أفرقك; a nominative would instead present فرق as a topic. SIBAWAYH (author): After ولو, an apparent noun normally rests on an omitted كان or يكون, so ولو حمارا is preferred; a nominative is possible but remote because لو selects verbs. SIBAWAYH (author): An adjective after ولو must be accusative because it cannot stand in place of a noun; the source contrasts ولو باردا with the acceptable noun ائتنى بتمر. SIBAWAYH (author): ادفع الشر ولو إصبعا means even if you push it a finger’s breadth or it were a finger; accusative follows the implied action, while raising is less natural. SIBAWAYH (author): After news of an arrival or dream, خير مقدم and خيرا can be accusative as an omitted verbal response; nominative makes an independent statement such as هذا خير مقدم. SIBAWAYH (author): Accusative after the conditional particle is also possible: the answer is jussive, and its noun is analogized to a predicate, although the analogy is not complete. SIBAWAYH (author): Formulae like مصاحب معان and مبرور مأجور are nominative with an understood أنت; راشدا مهديا is commonly accusative with اذهب, though raising is also possible. SIBAWAYH (author): A reply صادقا والله after a report means قاله صادقا; its accusative is licensed by the implied act of saying or reciting. SIBAWAYH (author): In متعرضا لعنن لم يعنه, the omitted verb is recoverable from the visible situation: the person has approached an undertaking without being summoned to it. SIBAWAYH (author): In bargaining, بيع الملطى omits أبايعك; مواعيد عرقوب similarly omits واعدتني because the shared situation and prior history supply the verb. SIBAWAYH (author): After someone mentions a person, أهل ذاك or أهله can mean you mentioned his family; accusative follows the semantic act, while nominative supplies هو. SIBAWAYH (author): When the verb is omitted, suppressing the accusative-governing verb is better; omitting a nominative-governing verb also requires omitting its predicate, and extra ellipsis weakens the parse. SIBAWAYH (author): A following adjective or appositive tied to the previously mentioned person must be accusative; حق or كذب can instead introduce an independent condition with its own omitted كان or وقع. SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yunus reports Hudba ibn Khashram’s verse as an Arabic example of an إن clause whose verbal material is understood from context. SIBAWAYH (author): Layla al-Akhyaliyya, Ibn Hammam al-Sululi, and al-Nabigha illustrate accusative adjectives or descriptions that remain tied to the person named earlier in the clause. SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yunus attributes to some Arabs إن لا صالح فطالح, understood as an omitted مررت clause: if I did not meet a righteous person, I met a wicked one. SIBAWAYH (author): Sibawayh calls that analysis weak because it requires an extra omitted verb after إن لا; the fuller إن لا يكن صالحا فطالح requires less ellipsis."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p4", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#46).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In coordinated clauses, the nearer verb governs the noun visibly, while the first predication remains understood; the listener recovers it without giving one noun both nominative and accusative roles. SIBAWAYH (author): If the following noun is the nearer verb's subject, an earlier verb still needs an understood subject; a verb may lack an object but cannot lack a subject. SIBAWAYH (author): In ḍarabnī wa-ḍarabtuhum qawmuka, the noun can be raised by the nearer verb with an understood pronoun; apposition instead requires the plural ḍarabūnī. SIBAWAYH (author): A nominative noun after ḍarabtu wa-ḍarabnī is usual; accusative Zaydan is possible by analogy with expressions such as matā raʾayta Zaydan munṭaliqan. SIBAWAYH (author): Ḍarabnī wa-ḍarabtu qawmuka is possible but awkward if treated as singular; special agreement such as huwa aḥsan al-fityān wa-ajmaluhu does not generalize to ordinary noun phrases. SIBAWAYH (الأخفش): Al-Akhfash calls the singular-agreement analysis poor by analogy and warns it could wrongly license forms such as aṣḥābuka jalasa. SIBAWAYH (author): Al-Farazdaq, Ṭufayl al-Ghanawī, and a poet of Bāhila illustrate clauses where the first verb is understood semantically while the second governs in form and meaning; their lines include سبني, جرى, and تصبى. SIBAWAYH (author): ʿUmar b. Abī Rabīʿa illustrates an understood subject pronoun appearing in the latter clause of the coordinated construction. SIBAWAYH (author): Al-Marrār al-Asadī's verse supplies another poetic example of the coordinated construction and its understood pronoun. SIBAWAYH (author): Imruʾ al-Qays uses قليل as nominative because little money is not what he seeks; making it the object of طلب would distort the intended meaning. SIBAWAYH (author): Sībawayh cites Qur'an 33:35 as evidence that a later coordinated form can leave unexpressed material already supplied by the earlier form. | mentions 33:35 SIBAWAYH (author): The nearer governor is preferred for proximity and because the listener can recover the earlier predication; prepositional phrases show the same attachment principle. SIBAWAYH (author): Qays b. al-Khaṭīm's coordinated نحن and أنت share the predicate rāḍ, illustrating understood material across clauses. SIBAWAYH (author): Ḍābiʾ al-Burjumī coordinates the speaker with Qiyār under a shared predicate, another poetic case of understood material. SIBAWAYH (author): Ibn Aḥmar uses a singular predicate for himself and his father; the listener understands that the quality applies to both. SIBAWAYH (author): Al-Farazdaq omits a predicate after the first coordinated clause because the later predicate lets the listener recover it. SIBAWAYH (author): The preferred construction uses the nearer verb without putting a singular form for a plural, or a plural for a singular; poetry further illustrates the rule. SIBAWAYH (author): With a first singular verb followed by a plural verb and a noun, the form is licensed either by the akalūnī al-barāghīth dialect or by apposition to the plural pronoun."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p5", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#775).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Frequent use of medial wāw and yāʾ led speakers to shift their vowel to the preceding radical, contract the weak letter, and avoid retaining the sound pattern of an unchanged strong verb. SIBAWAYH (أبو الخطاب): Abū al-Khaṭṭāb reports dialectal كيد and ما زيل for كاد and زال; speakers shift the vowel as in the passive patterns rather than restore the original vowel. SIBAWAYH (author): When these verbs take first-person plural or plural endings, dialects retain kasra or ḍamma and delete the weak letter at the meeting of two sukūns; some use rounding or imāla to signal the deleted yāʾ. SIBAWAYH (author): مِتُّ and كِدتُ weaken directly from فعل يفعل rather than through the shifted pattern of قلت and زدت; they are exceptional against the common paradigms. SIBAWAYH (author): ليس is treated as a fixed, minimally inflected form: its lack of an imperfect, participle, verbal noun, and productive derivation accounts for its distinctive contraction. SIBAWAYH (author): عور يعور, حول يحول, and صيد يصيد retain their original pattern because their meanings correspond to forms that must preserve the weak radical, such as اعوررت and ابيضضت. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl derives طاح يطيح and تاه يتيه from a wāw-root فعل يفعل pattern, supported by طوحت and توهت; some speakers instead analogize طيحت and تيهت to باع يبيع. SIBAWAYH (author): The weak-letter changes in طاح and تاه reflect the frequency of wāw and yāʾ: deletion and sukun avoid accumulating their heavy vowel combinations. SIBAWAYH (author): قُلْتُ is analyzed as a shifted hollow form originally on فعلت; its imperfect يقول confirms the pattern, and Arabic has no corresponding فعلته form. SIBAWAYH (author): طُلْتُ belongs to فعلت, as طويل and طوال show; this analysis keeps it intransitive. SIBAWAYH (بعضهم): Some speakers analyze طلت like قلت as a shifted فعلت form; on that analysis طلت becomes transitive, unlike the author's preferred account. SIBAWAYH (author): The ya-root forms retain kasra: yāʾ is lighter than wāw, and shifting the light yāʾ into a heavier wāw pattern would be avoided. SIBAWAYH (author): بعتُ is derived through a shifted فعلت pattern, yielding the imperfect يبيع; the shifted pattern governs the imperfect as well as the perfect. SIBAWAYH (author): The imperfects يقول and يبيع follow the paradigms to which their perfects were shifted, while يخاف and يهاب remain on their original فعل يفعل pattern. SIBAWAYH (author): Forms such as يخاف and يهاب differ from يزيد and يبيع because the former weakened in their original pattern rather than after being shifted into another one. SIBAWAYH (author): In passive forms such as خيف and بيع the basic vowel is kasra; some speakers signal that form with imāla, while other u-vowel pronunciations are secondary assimilations.
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
