<<chunk 36, part 3 of 0..8>>
efinite; an accusative circumstantial use is marked when the expression describes the first noun itself, though it can be a separate state. SIBAWAYH (رؤبة): Ruʾba uses غلام لك مقبلا as a circumstantial phrase separate from the first noun, showing that an indefinite noun may take a circumstantial description."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p12", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#247).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalil allows من and ما here to be indefinite common nouns like إنسان and شيء, with what follows functioning as an adjective. SIBAWAYH (author): هذا من منطلق is awkward when منطلق is a complement or adjective, but longer wording such as من خير منك works; al-Khalil heard Arabs say ما أنا بالذي قائل لك سوءا. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalil reports hearing an Arab say ما أنا بالذي قائل لك سوءا and ما أنا بالذي قائل لك قبيحا, showing a descriptive complement after الذي. SIBAWAYH (author): In the alternate construction, من and ما serve as relative forms that require a following complement; the words are not intended to stand empty of either complement or description. SIBAWAYH (author): When the following material is a relative complement, من and ما are definite, like الذي; the source applies this rule to the dependent clause after الذي. SIBAWAYH (author): In هذا من أعرف منطلق, أعرف is an adjective; in هذا من أعرف منطلقا it is a relative complement, while منطلق can also be a predicate as in هذا عبد الله منطلق. SIBAWAYH (author): In الجماء الغفير, الغفير is a required descriptive emphasis, illustrating how a noun can need its descriptor to complete the expression. SIBAWAYH (author): The construction رب من supports taking من as indefinite because what follows رب is always indefinite; Amr ibn Qumai'a, Umayya ibn Abi al-Salt, and other poets provide examples."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p13", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#343).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): When a man named Rād is addressed as yā Rād, kasra is restored because that is the vowel the consonant would have had without assimilation. SIBAWAYH (author): In truncating Mufarr, the first rāʾ remains quiescent because its preceding consonant is vowelled. SIBAWAYH (author): Truncated Muḥmār and Muḍārr retain the vowel of the original doubled form; the passive-intended Muḍārr is likewise treated as shortened from muḍārrar. SIBAWAYH (author): The first rāʾ of a doubled form is not an ordinary augment and should not be deleted with the second; its behavior differs from genuine augment letters. SIBAWAYH (author): When Asḥār loses its final rāʾ, the preceding quiescent rāʾ must be vowelled to avoid two adjacent quiescent consonants. SIBAWAYH (author): The fatḥa on Asḥār's rāʾ follows the nearest vowel source, like the vowel placed on the last consonant in jussive geminates. SIBAWAYH (رجل من أزد السراة): A man of Azd al-Sarāt is cited reciting a line about a child and father, supporting the rule that the nearest vowel supplies the movement. SIBAWAYH (author): Asḥār differs from Muḥmār: Muḥmār's underlying form has two rāʾs, while Asḥār is inherently assimilated and its first rāʾ is only quiescent."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p14", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#471).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl explains subjunctive حتى as marking a destination: the verb is subjunctive when it is the endpoint, just as a noun is genitive after the corresponding preposition. SIBAWAYH (author): حتى also takes a subjunctive when it expresses purpose, like كي with an implicit أن, as in speaking to someone so that he will give an order. SIBAWAYH (author): Indicative after حتى can describe an entry that immediately follows and is connected with the movement; حتى then introduces a clause like إذا rather than expressing a goal or purpose. SIBAWAYH (author): Indicative حتى can also introduce a present result after an earlier completed action, as in illness that has now made recovery unlikely; this is not a continuous endpoint. SIBAWAYH (author): Both indicative constructions are particles of inception with the same basic sense; they differ in whether the later action occurred together with the earlier one or is a present result of it. SIBAWAYH (author): The Farazdaq's حتى كليب and Ḥassān ibn Thābit's حتى لا تهر support the inceptive use of حتى; the camel example likewise describes a present event after the clause. SIBAWAYH (author): ʿAlqama ibn ʿAbada's verse illustrates a connected sequence: the later riding and the earlier departure both belong to the past, and neither occurs without the other."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p15", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#730).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): At pause, hāʾ can make audible the final vowel on noninflectional dual and plural nūns, whose preceding consonant is still; the examples include ضاربانه and مسلمونه. SIBAWAYH (author): The same pause hāʾ appears in أينه and ثمه because their nūn or final consonant is uninflected, preceded by a still consonant, and phonetically hidden; هلمه is another example. SIBAWAYH (author): Many Arab speakers do not add hāʾ at pause when no segment has been deleted; whenever it is added, it disappears before continuing speech. SIBAWAYH (author): Similar forms include إنه for إن, اعلمنه with an extra noninflectional nūn, and كيفه, ليته, and لعله; their endings are treated alike in pause. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl reports انطلقته for انطلقت because its tāʾ is not an inflectional ending and is preceded by a still consonant. SIBAWAYH (author): Possessive yāʾ suffixes after alif or yāʾ also take pause hāʾ, since the yāʾ is hidden and follows a still consonant, as in غلامايه and عصايه."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p16", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#590).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Plural patterns such as masājid and mafātīḥ resist further broken pluralization as endpoint patterns; as male names they take sound masculine plurals and as female names sound feminine plurals. SIBAWAYH (author): A plural-derived name such as aʿbud can take both a diminutive and a broken plural, yielding al-aʿābid, because its pattern permits these processes like a singular. SIBAWAYH (author): A three-consonant plural pattern used as a name follows the broken plural expected of a singular with that form, since it can shift into singular-like patterns and diminutives. SIBAWAYH (author): A man named on the fuʿūl pattern may form faʿāʾil, since fuʿūl can also be singular and behaves like an existing plural pattern. SIBAWAYH (author): A man named Jamāl on a pattern like singular jirāb takes the broken plural expected of a singular of that form. SIBAWAYH (author): Tamra used as a name has shifted from its original meaning and behaves like qaṣʿa, allowing tamār just as qaṣʿa allows qiṣāʿ."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p17", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#721).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): A following kasra on ر can make a preceding open vowel incline toward kasra: the ر is like two kasra-bearing consonants, so Sibawayh analogizes its effect to ي. SIBAWAYH (author): Imala is blocked when an open vowel follows the alif or when an emphatic consonant resists it, as in المحاذر and حاضر. SIBAWAYH (author): With ابن مذعور, the speaker approaches kasra after ر but does not incline the و, since it does not resemble ي and tilting it would also tilt what precedes. SIBAWAYH (author): A following separate word with ر and kasra can cause imala across the word boundary, as in خبط رياح and قفا رياح. SIBAWAYH (author): Other speakers leave forms uninclined when the conditioning kasra is too far away across a word boundary, as in مال قاسم, خبط رياح, and قفا رياح. SIBAWAYH (author): Some speakers incline before ر in من عمرو but not من الشرق because the latter ر is followed by an emphatic consonant; this also blocks the pattern in مارق."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p18", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#190).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Al-awwalu fa-l-awwalu resembles source-like nouns without matching them in every respect, functioning like wāḥidan fa-wāḥidan or rajulan rajulan. SIBAWAYH (author): In an imperative, accusative al-awwalu fa-l-awwalu is standard; it cannot be a badal or adjective because the corresponding readings are invalid. SIBAWAYH (عيسى): ʿĪsā explains the imperative as meaning li-yadkhul, “let the first enter,” and parses the phrase according to that underlying meaning. SIBAWAYH (author): When the words are intended as direct adjectives, fa cannot join them; wa is acceptable, as supported by Umayyah ibn Abī ʿĀʾidh's verse. SIBAWAYH (أمية بن أبي عائذ): Umayyah's poem with wa-shaʿthin supports coordination by wa; substituting fa before shaʿthin would be poor usage. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl allows al-awwalu fa-l-awwalu wa-l-awsaṭu wa-l-ākhiru by treating the sequence as a badal construction like kullukum."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p19", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#44).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalil explains mā aḥsana ʿAbd Allāh as an exclamation, conceptually like saying shayʾun aḥsana ʿAbd Allāh; that paraphrase is illustrative, not an utterance. SIBAWAYH (author): The exclamative construction has fixed order and cannot be recast as mā yaḥsunu or another ordinary verb form; it uses one pattern because speakers do not conjugate it. SIBAWAYH (author): The form can derive from roots such as ḥasuna, karuma, and aʿṭā yet behaves as a fixed nominal pattern, like lāta and mā; ajdal is likewise treated as a noun despite its verbal root. SIBAWAYH (author): In innī mimmā an aṣnaʿ, mā alone is a noun meaning the matter. SIBAWAYH (author): Naʿman in ghusiltuhu ghaslan naʿman means excellent washing, literally niʿma al-ghusl. SIBAWAYH (author): Adding kāna in mā kāna aḥsana Zaydan marks the exclamation as referring to the past."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p20", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#785).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Broken plurals on the fiʿāl pattern can yield expanded forms such as diyāwīr an
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
