<<chunk 36, part 2 of 0..8>>
"}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p6", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#287).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yūnus says the meaning is the same in the nominative and accusative, supporting the accusative adjective analysis. SIBAWAYH (author): Ya akhānā Zaydan is coordinated with the preceding accusative; Yūnus reports Abu ʿAmr and Medina speakers also say ya akhānā Zayd. SIBAWAYH (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr says ya Zayd Zayd al-ṭawīlu, repeating the name in a construction explained like ya Zayd al-ṭawīlu. SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yūnus reports that Ruʾbah used the accusative repetition ya Zayd Zaydan al-ṭawīlu. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Some recite ya Naṣru Naṣru Naṣran, retaining a raised second name before the final accusative form. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl explains accusative al-Naḍr in ya Zayd wa-l-Naḍra as restoration to the underlying case. SIBAWAYH (العرب): Most Arabs whom Sībawayh observed say ya Zayd wa-l-Naḍru with the second name raised. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl treats ya ʿAmru wa-l-Ḥārith as though ya were repeated; a definite noun with alif-lām cannot itself be directly called by ya. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl argues that accusative al-Naḍr would wrongly license accusative sakhlihā in kullu naʿjatin wa-sakhlihā, though its case comes from an understood preposition. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl says raising the coordinated definite noun treats it as wa-Nuḍr; conjunctions share the first element's syntactic governance. SIBAWAYH (author): A coordinated element that follows later enters the same syntactic relation as the first; direct adjacency can prevent the intended indefinite reading. SIBAWAYH (author): Ya hādhā dhā al-jummati has the same construction as ya Zayd dhā al-jummati, with no disagreement. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl allows ya Zayd al-ṭawīlu to be accusative as an adjective of an accusative or as an understood aʿnī, “I mean.” SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl says ya Zayd nafsahu, ya Tamīm kullakum, and ya Qays kullahum are accusative, like ya Zayd dhā al-jummati. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): With ya Tamīm ajmaʿūn, either nominative or accusative is possible; accusative cannot be an aʿnī construction."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p7", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#510).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): In ‘إني مما أفعل,’ ما can combine with من as one unit, as in ربما; Abū Ḥayya al-Numayrī’s line illustrates ربما. SIBAWAYH (author): Nouns such as أهل and مخافة can be annexed directly to an أن-clause, with the sense of أهل لأن يفعل and مخافة لأن يفعل. SIBAWAYH (author): Some Arabs say ‘لحق أنه ذاهب’ to mean ‘يقين أنه ذاهب,’ but this usage is not common to all Arabs. SIBAWAYH (author): خليق accepts either لأن يفعل or أن يفعل; عسيت أن تفعل similarly follows near-approach verbs such as قاربت and دنوت. SIBAWAYH (author): عسى and اخلولقت take an أن-clause without a verbal-noun alternative here; Arabs do not say ‘عسيت الفعل’ or ‘عسيت للفعل.’ SIBAWAYH (author): عسى is usually invariant across singular, plural, and feminine subjects, though some Arabs inflect it; with inflected forms, أن is accusative as in عسيت أن. SIBAWAYH (author): Some Arabs use عسى يفعل like كاد يفعل, with a finite verb replacing the accusative noun in the proverb ‘عسى الغوير أبؤسا’; poetry attests this use. SIBAWAYH (author): كاد and كرب normally take a finite verb without أن; poetry permits كاد أن by analogy with عسى, and لعل أن by analogy with عسيت أن. SIBAWAYH (author): يوشك أن تجيء attaches أن to يوشك; توشك أن تجيء is like قاربت أن تفعل, while poetry also uses يوشك يجيء by analogy with عسى. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl explains al-Farazdaq’s ‘إن أذنا قتيبة حزتا’ by avoiding separation of أن from its verb, as with كي; it follows إن, which permits nouns before verbs. SIBAWAYH (author): After temporal بعد, أن plus a verb stands for a verbal noun; likewise ‘أما أن أسير’ means ‘أما السيرورة.’ SIBAWAYH (author): ‘ما منعك أن تأتينا’ means ‘what prevented you from coming to us’: من is omitted before the أن-clause. SIBAWAYH (author): In ‘إني مما أن أفعل ذاك,’ ما stands for الأمر or الشأن: ‘it is a matter that I do that.’ SIBAWAYH (author): ‘بعد ما تقول ذاك القول’ means ‘بعد قولك’; inserting من in ‘من بعد ما’ shows that بعد and ما are not one word."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p8", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#560).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from ʿAdī, Ghanī, Quṣayy, and Umayyah uses wāw to avoid four consecutive yāʾs, deleting the extra yāʾ as in Sulaym and Thaqīf. SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from taḥiyyah becomes taḥwī, deleting the yāʾ most like the deleted element in ʿAdī; similar forms follow it. SIBAWAYH (author): Qusī and thudī yield qaswī and thadwī because they are fuʿūl forms; when the following kasra disappears, the original pattern returns. SIBAWAYH (author): With marma and marmawwiyyah, delete the first two yāʾs and keep the nisba yāʾs; those saying ḥānawī also say marmwī. SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yūnus reports that some Arabs retain the yāʾ in Umayyī, analogizing to Ṭayyiʾī; ʿAdiyyī is heavier because of the kasra among yāʾs. SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from ḥayyah becomes ḥayawī to avoid consecutive yāʾs; the yāʾ is vocalized so wāw can remain after it. SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from layyah becomes lawawī by restoring the underlying form after moving yāʾ; speakers who say Umayyī also say ḥayyī. SIBAWAYH (أبو عمرو): Abū ʿAmr used ḥayyī and layyī, including layyah from the phrase for twisting someone's hand. SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from ʿaduww and kuwwah remains ʿaduwwī and kuwwī because there are not enough consecutive yāʾs to require substitution. SIBAWAYH (author): Nisba from ʿadwah becomes ʿadawī because the feminine tāʾ triggers the same treatment as in shanrah/shanʾī."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p9", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#723).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): Hamzat al-waṣl is prefixed so speech can begin before a quiescent consonant; it is an added, vowelled onset. SIBAWAYH (author): Sībawayh reports Yunus's account that some speakers say īm Allāh with kasra, then līm Allāh by analogy with the waṣl in ibn. SIBAWAYH (author): Waṣl occurs in imperatives of form I when the next consonant is quiescent, in forms such as infaʿala, ifʿalla, and iftaʿala, and in five further derived patterns including istafʿala. SIBAWAYH (author): The alif in afʿala is formative rather than an added onset for a quiescent consonant, so its conjugation behaves like a four-letter verb. SIBAWAYH (author): At the start of speech, waṣl is normally kasra but takes ḍamma when the third letter has ḍamma. SIBAWAYH (author): Sībawayh cites al-Nuʿmān b. Bashīr's line as a poetic example following the rule for adjusting vowels together. SIBAWAYH (author): Alif-lām identifies nouns and behaves like qad or sawfa; Ghaylan's line uses bi-dhal and bi-jal, and Sībawayh says the lām is not broken once the form is complete. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalil treats the article as separable like qad and sawfa but meaningful; its initial fatḥa distinguishes it, and it remains before an interrogative alif to distinguish question from statement. SIBAWAYH (author): An unnamed poet's līman Allāh attests the connected onset in the oath expression."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p10", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#251).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): With an omitted complement, kull and baʿḍ are neither modifiers nor modified nouns; treating them as adjectives is awkward because it departs from their normal annexation. SIBAWAYH (author): Deleting the complement leaves kull and baʿḍ definite by association with a definite noun; Sībawayh compares this unusual ellipsis with other Arabic omissions. SIBAWAYH (author): Kull and baʿḍ are not adjectives; they occur sentence-initially or are built on a preceding noun or other element, as in the cited Qur'anic example. | mentions 27:87 SIBAWAYH (author): Jamiʿ can function like rajul in this construction; the Qur'anic example and Arabs' usage show it as a predicate meaning assembled. | mentions 36:32 SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Khalil regards predicative kulluhum as weak and prefers it as a subject or modifier after its antecedent; Sībawayh says Arab usage confirmed his account. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Khalil accepts أكلت شاة كل شاة but considers أكلت كل شاة weak, since kull does not normally generalize without an antecedent. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Kulluhum resembles emphatic forms such as ajmaʿīn and anfusahum, which modify rather than serve as predicates; it can nevertheless be predicative, albeit weakly. SIBAWAYH (author): Kulluhum, both dual forms, and kulluhunna follow the same pattern; jamiʿhum can also be an adjective or a noun-like subject or predicate. SIBAWAYH (author): Kull shayʾ and kull rajul must be annexed to another element because they cannot be used adjectivally."}, {"id": "2:282/q80/p11", "position": "SIBAWAYH supplies grammar context (#249).", "reasons": "SIBAWAYH (author): A definite description identifies or distinguishes someone already known and therefore cannot normally be used as an indefinite-style circumstantial phrase without confusing it with an indefinite noun. SIBAWAYH (الخليل): Al-Khalīl reports the Shammākh's verse using كل as an adjective of an indefinite خليل, supporting its indefinite use. SIBAWAYH (أبو الخطاب): Abū al-Khaṭṭāb reports a verse heard from reliable Arab speakers in which كل describes the indefinite فتى. SIBAWAYH (author): The accusative in أول فارس مقبلا does not make أول definite; the phrase means one of the horsemen, with من الفرسان omitted for brevity. SIBAWAYH (author): The omitted phrase is من الفرسان; it is not evidence that a numeral complement such as درهما in عشرون درهما is definite. SIBAWAYH (عيسى): ʿĪsā allows مقبلا in the accusative as a circumstantial predicate, and al-Khalīl also accepts this analysis; the nominative remains the preferred form. SIBAWAYH (يونس): Yūnus reports Arabs saying مررت بماء قعدة رجل and identifies the genitive as the proper case in this construction. SIBAWAYH (author): A descriptive adjective of an indefinite normally stays ind
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
