<<chunk 37, part 0 of 0..4>>
{"id": "2:282/q81", "question": "What do the cited works report about Quranic collection and readings generally?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q81/p1", "position": "ALUSI-FULL supplies sciences context (v1p21 #2).", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (author): A good-chain Ibn Abi Dawud report from Abd Khayr says Ali called Abu Bakr the person with the greatest merit in the codices and the first to collect God's Book in the stated official sense. ALUSI-FULL (author): Calling Abu Bakr the first collector does not conflict with al-Qarmani's statement that Umar first collected it, since the intended collection differs. ALUSI-FULL (أبو بريدة): Abu Burda's strange, disconnected report says Salim, freedman of Abu Hudhayfa, first collected the Quran in a codex, swearing not to wear his cloak until finishing. ALUSI-FULL (أنس): Alusi rejects saying Uthman first collected the Quran: al-Bukhari's report from Anas says Uthman standardized one reading in year 25 when Hudhayfa feared Syrian and Iraqi differences could divide the community. ALUSI-FULL (أنس): At Hudhayfa's urging, Uthman borrowed Hafsa's sheets, appointed Zayd and three Qurashis to copy them, directed Qurashi wording in disputes, returned the sheets, sent copies to regions, and burned other codices. ALUSI-FULL (سويد بن غفلة): A sahih Ibn Abi Dawud chain from Suwayd ibn Ghafala quotes Ali asking people to speak only well of Uthman, since he acted on the codices with the group's agreement; another report says Ali would have done the same. ALUSI-FULL (author): Alusi calls the report that Ibn Masud threatened to treat Uthman's codex as they treated his a lie, along with claims that Uthman mistreated him. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): In al-Bukhari's report, after the Yamama deaths Umar feared further losses among Quran reciters would cause the Quran to be lost and urged Abu Bakr to collect it. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Abu Bakr initially questioned doing what the Prophet had not done, but Umar persisted, saying collection was good, until God opened Abu Bakr's heart to the proposal. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Abu Bakr chose Zayd as young, intelligent, trusted, and a former revelation scribe; Zayd found collection as burdensome as moving a mountain, then accepted after Abu Bakr pressed him. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Zayd collected from palm stalks, flat stones, and men's memories; he found the end of al-Tawba only with Khuzayma al-Ansari, and the sheets later passed from Abu Bakr to Umar to Hafsa. | mentions 9:128 ALUSI-FULL (أبو بكر): A disconnected Ibn Abi Dawud report with trustworthy transmitters says Abu Bakr instructed Umar and Zayd to write any Quran text presented by two witnesses; Alusi supposes they attested its writing before the Prophet or its final-year review."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p2", "position": "BURHAN supplies sciences context (v1p235).", "reasons": "BURHAN (البيهقي): Al-Bayhaqi says Abu Bakr first gathered the Qur'an in one codex; Uthman later copied it into multiple codices when reading disagreements threatened to spread. BURHAN (زيد بن ثابت): Zayd reports that arrangement occurred in the Prophet's lifetime, the codex collection under Abu Bakr, and copying into codices under Uthman, drawing on both written materials and companions' memorization. BURHAN (author): The work was done with consultation and approval of the companions; ʿAli approved Uthman's effort and praised its result. BURHAN (القاضي أبو بكر): Al-Baqillani says Uthman aimed to unify people on readings established from the Prophet and discard unsupported forms, not to perform Abu Bakr's initial collection. BURHAN (القاضي أبو بكر): The Uthmanic codex excluded additions, omissions, glosses, and abrogated recitations, to prevent later corruption and doubt. BURHAN (أنس): Anas's report in al-Bukhari says Hudhayfa, alarmed by Syrian-Iraqi recitation disputes during campaigns in Armenia and Azerbaijan, urged Uthman to act before divisions resembled those among Jews and Christians. BURHAN (عثمان): Uthman borrowed Hafsa's sheets and appointed Zayd with three Quraysh members to copy them, instructing the Quraysh members to choose Quraysh speech if they disagreed with Zayd. BURHAN (عثمان): After copying, Uthman returned Hafsa's sheets, sent a codex to each region, and ordered other Qur'anic written materials burned."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p3", "position": "ITQAN supplies sciences context (v1p163).", "reasons": "ITQAN (ابن حجر): Ibn Hajar prefers the first account: writing on leather and palm stalks came first, then those materials were gathered into sheets under Abu Bakr, as several sound reports indicate. ITQAN (الحاكم): Al-Hakim calls the ordering of surahs in ʿUthman’s time the third collection of the Qur’an. ITQAN (حذيفة بن اليمان): During the Armenia and Azerbaijan campaign, Hudhayfa alarmed ʿUthman about recitation disputes among Syrian and Iraqi forces and urged him to protect the community from division. ITQAN (عثمان): ʿUthman borrowed Hafsa’s sheets and ordered Zayd and three Quraysh scribes to make codices, directing them to use Quraysh speech if they disagreed with Zayd. ITQAN (عثمان): After copying, ʿUthman returned Hafsa’s sheets, sent a codex to each region, and ordered other Qur’anic sheets and codices burned. ITQAN (سالم بن عبد الله ابن عمر): A report in Ibn Wahb’s Muwatta says Abu Bakr collected the Qur’an on sheets after Zayd first refused, then agreed when ʿUmar helped persuade him. ITQAN (ابن شهاب): After the losses at Yamama, Abu Bakr feared part of the Qur’an would be lost; people brought what they had and it was collected on paper under Abu Bakr, the first to gather it in sheets. ITQAN (زيد بن ثابت): In ʿUmarah ibn Ghaziyya’s version, Zayd says Abu Bakr had him write on leather and palm stalks, then ʿUmar put the material into one sheet kept with him."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p4", "position": "IBNATIYYA-FULL supplies sciences context (v1p47).", "reasons": "IBNATIYYA-FULL (حذيفة بن اليمان): Ḥudhayfa reports that, after transmitters and non-Arab readers spread across regions, Iraqi and Syrian groups disputed their readings in the Armenia campaign; some disavowed others’ recitations. IBNATIYYA-FULL (حذيفة بن اليمان): On returning to Medina, Ḥudhayfa urged ʿUthmān to act on the Book before the community split like Jews and Christians; ʿUthmān agreed to intervene. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عثمان بن عفان): ʿUthmān appointed capable, learned, eloquent men to prepare a codex, choosing among transmitted variants the best-known Prophetic readings and most eloquent language. IBNATIYYA-FULL (عثمان بن عفان): ʿUthmān instructed the scribes to use Quraysh’s language when they differed. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): The community followed the selected codex and set aside variant codices to prevent further division and preserve unity. IBNATIYYA-FULL (author): Ibn Masʿūd resisted replacing his codex, so it was left; scholars nevertheless barred reciting from it to prevent confusion, since explanatory notes were reportedly mistaken for Qurʾān."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p5", "position": "NASHR supplies sciences context (v1p6).", "reasons": "NASHR (أبو عبيد القاسم بن سلام): Abū ʿUbayd lists Companion transmitters of reading forms: numerous Muhājirūn including Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, ʿUthmān, and Ibn Masʿūd, and Anṣār including Ubayy, Muʿādh, Zayd, and Anas. NASHR (أبو بكر الصديق): After the Prophet’s death and the wars against apostates and Musaylima, in which about five hundred Companions were killed, Abū Bakr was urged to compile the Qurʾan lest it be lost with them; he first hesitated because the Prophet had not ordered it. NASHR (زيد بن ثابت): Abū Bakr and the Companions agreed to collection, and Zayd ibn Thābit gathered the Qurʾan into sheets kept successively by Abū Bakr, ʿUmar, and Ḥafṣa. NASHR (عثمان): ʿUthmān borrowed Ḥafṣa’s sheets and appointed Zayd, Ibn al-Zubayr, Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn al-Ḥārith to copy them; in disagreement with Zayd, they were to write in Quraysh’s tongue because revelation came in it. NASHR (عثمان): ʿUthmān sent codices to Basra, Kufa, Syria, Mecca, Yemen, and Bahrain, left one in Medina, and kept the central copy for himself. NASHR (author): The community agreed on the contents of these codices and set aside divergent additions, omissions, and word substitutions that had been permitted but were not established by widespread transmission as Qurʾan."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p6", "position": "TAB-FULL supplies sciences context (v1p55).", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Zayd reports that after Yamāma's losses, ʿUmar urged collecting the Qur'an; Abū Bakr initially refused because the Prophet had not done so, then accepted the proposal and assigned Zayd. TAB-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): Zayd says he gathered the Qur'an from parchment, shoulder blades, and palm stalks; the single sheet later passed from Abū Bakr to ʿUmar and Ḥafṣa. TAB-FULL (حذيفة بن اليمان): Ḥudhayfa warned ʿUthmān after seeing Syrians and Iraqis recite differently in Armenia and accuse each other's readings of unbelief. TAB-FULL (عثمان بن عفان): ʿUthmān commissioned Zayd and the eloquent Abān ibn Saʿīd to produce a codex, write what they agreed on, and refer disagreements to him. TAB-FULL (عثمان بن عفان): ʿUthmān borrowed Ḥafṣa's sheet, collated the codex without finding differences, returned it, ordered copies made, then after her death reclaimed and erased the sheet."}, {"id": "2:282/q81/p7", "position": "IBNKATHIR-FULL supplies sciences context (v1p27 #2).", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (حذيفة بن اليمان): During the Armenia and Azerbaijan campaigns, Ḥudhayfa heard Syrian and Iraqi Muslims differing in their recitations and warned ʿUthmān to act before the community divided over scripture as Jews and Christians had. IBNKATHIR-FULL (عثمان بن عفان): ʿUthmān borrowed Ḥafṣa’s pages and commissioned Zayd ibn Thābit, ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr, Saʿīd ibn al-ʿĀṣ, and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn al-Ḥārith to copy them into codices. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathir c
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
