<<chunk 37, part 2 of 0..4>>
"id": "2:282/q82", "question": "What broader claims about Quranic eloquence accompany the verse?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q82/p1", "position": "GHARNATI supplies rhetoric context (v1p179).", "reasons": "GHARNATI (author): The author invokes the Qurʾan’s exalted standing in the heavenly register as part of his praise of the divine gift of scripture. | mentions 43:4 GHARNATI (author): Muhammad is praised as the chosen prophet endowed with the Book and clear proofs that open the path for people of insight. GHARNATI (author): The cited warning says that only one who follows the Reminder and fears the Merciful unseen benefits from the Messenger’s warning. | mentions 36:11 GHARNATI (النبي): The Prophet says every prophet received signs sufficient for people to believe, while his own special gift was revelation, through which he hopes to have the most followers on Judgment Day. GHARNATI (author): The author says the Prophet had countless miracles besides the Qurʾan, but the Qurʾan is the clearest, wisest, most guiding, and most enduring miracle. GHARNATI (author): The Qurʾan joins proof and testimony with clarification of the path and the condition of each group, and remains directly observable to those who reflect. GHARNATI (author): Unlike other miracles known through later reports rather than direct observation, the Qurʾan remains pure and present for reflection across the ages."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p2", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p284).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): Punning can be learned from books such as Kitab al-Ajnas and Kitab al-ʿAyn, and antithesis is easier; the eloquence at issue in Qur’anic inimitability cannot be acquired by study. BAQILLANI (author): Learnable capacities converge at a customary limit, like human strength; exceeding that limit breaks convention and can serve as a prophetic sign under the proper conditions. BAQILLANI (author): Exceptional lines or phrases may occur rarely in a poet’s or writer’s work, so a person may be famed for only one or two; if all speech sustained that level, it could be called miraculous. BAQILLANI (author): Humans can produce a fine word or phrase, but cannot compose a surah or equivalent or attain the Qur’an’s level of eloquence and oratory. BAQILLANI (author): Eloquence means conveying the self’s intended meaning with the best sense and strongest wording, reaching the utterance’s full purpose."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p3", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p286).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): Speech becomes miraculous when it surpasses eloquence’s customary limit and reaches a level even the most accomplished practitioners cannot attain. BAQILLANI (author): The Qur’an differs from other speech in its genre and style and in exceeding the human limit of eloquence. BAQILLANI (السائل): An objection asks why a poet’s rare brilliant passage could not become the model for all his work through supreme mastery, just as the Qur’an might be exceptional speech. BAQILLANI (author): After a long challenge and repeated rebukes, the Qur’an alone holds the lead; everyone failed, some recognizing their incapacity without understanding its cause. BAQILLANI (author): Its rupture of customary human ability is a miracle and proof that the prophet who brought it is truthful in his claim and rightly guided."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p4", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p120).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): An accomplished critic recognizes each speaker’s style and ranks speech accurately, including whether a writer excels in only certain genres or throughout. BAQILLANI (author): Poets may excel selectively in praise, invective, humor, or description; an expert knows each person’s limits and can identify their later work. BAQILLANI (author): Experts distinguish Abu Tammam from al-Buhturi except where the former drops artifice and adopts an easy, bookish style resembling the latter. BAQILLANI (author): He lists recognizable styles among al-Aʿsha, Imruʾ al-Qays, al-Nabigha, Zuhayr, Jarir, al-Akhtal, al-Baʿith, and al-Farazdaq."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p5", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p291).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (السائل): An objection asks whether the Prophet’s exceptional eloquence could have produced the Qur’an, since he is reported to have called himself the most eloquent Arab. BAQILLANI (author): The Prophet did not challenge others to match his own speech; his difference from other eloquent people is an ordinary gradation like that between poets or orators. BAQILLANI (السائل): An objection invokes reports that Ibn Masʿud was uncertain whether the two protecting surahs or the qunut supplication belonged to the Qur’an. | mentions 113:1, 114:1 BAQILLANI (author): He calls this an infidel’s confusion: the Companions knew the Qur’an and its surah count, and no Qur’anic material could have been unknown to them."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p6", "position": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ supplies rhetoric context (p129).", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الفخر الرازي): Al-Razi recast Jurjani's theory in a better order and style, while acknowledging that Jurjani established its principles and rules but left the topics poorly arranged and wrote at great length. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (ابن أبي الإصبع المصري): Ibn Abi al-Isba's Badi al-Qur'an organized rhetoric into 120 chapters seeking Qur'anic examples, but usually named a device and supplied examples without explaining their rhetorical force. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (السكاكي): Al-Sakkaki made rhetoric in Miftah al-Ulum an autonomous, rule-bound craft, separating it from the question of inimitability and from the syntactic meanings Jurjani had included in nazm. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): Later rhetoric concentrated on formal taxonomies of simile, metaphor, figurative language, metonymy, and embellishment, while Qur'anic examples were sparse beside examples from human speech."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p7", "position": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ supplies rhetoric context (p32).", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): The passage condemns people who relabel falsehood, degradation, shamelessness, error, and unbelief as utility, instinct, freedom, reason, and science, then call themselves scholars and reformers. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): A teacher may wear a turban and claim religious standing while carrying a destructive scientific ideology into the young; the reader should not be deceived by appearances. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): The passage depicts such a teacher as parasitic and socially destructive, weakening life and strength and leaving illness, harm, or constriction wherever he acts. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): The author says scholars unfairly burden the Qur'an with every scientific objection and shun it, like aircraft deluded by rising into the sky and mounting a campaign toward the sun."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p8", "position": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ supplies rhetoric context (p89).", "reasons": "BINTSHATI-IJAZ (بعض المتكلمين): A theologian's argument says either the Qur'an is inherently beyond human imitation, or people could imitate it but were prevented from doing so, making their failure miraculous. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (ابن كثير): Ibn Kathir finds the diversion argument unsatisfactory because the Qur'an is inherently miraculous, though useful as a concessive argument in debate. BINTSHATI-IJAZ (الرازي): Al-Razi uses this argument in his tafsir to explain the miraculousness of short suras such as al-Asr and al-Kawthar. | mentions 103:1, 108:1 BINTSHATI-IJAZ (author): The theoretical debate did not end rhetorical inquiry: later Mu'tazilites treated diversion as one aspect of inimitability, while non-Mu'tazilite surveyors soon focused on rhetorical inimitability."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p9", "position": "YKHULI-TAJDID supplies rhetoric context (c2).", "reasons": "YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Rhetoric studied the Qur’an’s inimitability, jurisprudence derived rulings by analogy with it, and kalām rationalized it and developed toward philosophy. YKHULI-TAJDID (أمين الخولي): Al-Khūlī treats the Qur’an’s psychological inimitability as its profound effect on the human psyche through sweetness of wording and meaning, sound, and rhythm. YKHULI-TAJDID (السكاكي): Al-Sakkākī’s view, as reported through Al-Khūlī, is that the Qur’an’s psychological inimitability is apprehended through artistic taste rather than described or explained. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The Qur’an is miraculous literary art serving religious guidance: art voices the conscience, while religion addresses belief and the heart and disciplines human feeling."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p10", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p256).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): The report derives qasida from accumulated marrow, as opposed to scattered marrow, and cites Labid’s stacked ostrich eggs as evidence for the sense of layered accumulation. BAQILLANI (بعض علماء هذه الصنعة): An unnamed master attributes such exceptional lines to deep command of the craft and broad knowledge, which can yield effects beyond calculation or classification. BAQILLANI (author): He reaffirms that speech equal in measure to a surah is miraculous."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p11", "position": "BAQILLANI supplies rhetoric context (v1p58).", "reasons": "BAQILLANI (author): What resembles sajʿ in the Qur’an is not necessarily sajʿ: ordinary sajʿ makes wording follow the cadence, whereas Qur’anic phrasing follows the meaning. BAQILLANI (author): When meaning is organized independently of cadence, the cadence is merely decorative rather than necessary to the meaning; he distinguishes this from meaning tied to sajʿ. BAQILLANI (author): Even if some passages combine the two patterns, a detailed treatment is outside the book’s scope; apparent non-sajʿ passages contain subtler benefits."}, {"id": "2:282/q82/p12", "position": "JURJANI-ASRAR supplies rhetoric context (v1p329).", "reasons": "JURJANI-ASRAR (author): Jurjānī endorses a
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
