<<chunk 38, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "2:282/q83", "question": "What interpretive methods do the cited works discuss?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q83/p1", "position": "YKHULI-TAJDID supplies interpretation context (c2).", "reasons": "YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Al-Khūlī’s approach to Qur’anic interpretation lies at the intersection of preserving intellectual origins and renewing them. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Although modern historical, archaeological, and anthropological research recovered ancient national origins, consciousness had already settled within the Qur’anic frame. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The Qur’an became the center around which the heritage sciences arose, beginning with the linguistic disciplines because the Qur’an is a linguistic phenomenon. YKHULI-TAJDID (حسن حنفي): Ḥasan Ḥanafī contrasts an Islamic civilization formed around the Qur’an with Western Christian civilization, where the book emerged from tradition; the Gospels followed the Christian call rather than serving as its source. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author notes that seventeenth-century historical criticism, associated with Spinoza, Richard Simon, and Jean Astruc, examined alteration and change in sacred books. YKHULI-TAJDID (حسن حنفي): Ḥasan Ḥanafī identifies three distinguishing Qur’anic features: it is the final, complete revelation; preserved in writing; and revealed gradually over twenty-three years in response to human needs. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author links gradual, situation-responsive revelation to Al-Khūlī’s principle that the Qur’an is closely connected to human life, which grounds his literary school of interpretation. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Al-Khūlī’s literary approach challenges rigid, literal, static exegesis because that mode permits neither development nor renewal. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Interpretation is the starting point for intellectual work that renews the civilization, because the Qur’an anchors its origins and Muslim communal identity. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Al-Khūlī uses the psychological dimension to connect religion and literature and argues for reading the Qur’an topic by topic. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Topical interpretation is always colored by the historical period in which it is undertaken. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The Qur’an uses taʾwīl, while legal theorists developed a specialized sense that later became common among theologians; Al-Khūlī considers tafsīr broader than taʾwīl. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Interpretive forms multiply because interpreters bring different cultural backgrounds to the text. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Hermeneutics has an older sense, the interpretation of sacred books, and a modern sense that developed into a major late-twentieth-century philosophical current. YKHULI-TAJDID (فيلهلم دلتاي): Dilthey’s hermeneutic position treats interpretation or understanding as a method for the social and historical sciences. YKHULI-TAJDID (مارتن هيدجر): Heidegger’s position treats interpretation as an ontological, existential event in which text and interpreter interact within the history of understanding. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author follows the Heideggerian line, treating hermeneutics as lived experience of texts and as dialogue that fuses text and reader across past and present. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Hermeneutics applies to religious, inherited, philosophical, and legal texts; in reading, text and reader, past and present, enter a reciprocal relation that keeps new understanding possible. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): A text gains particular content when a present-day reader speaks on its behalf; without the present’s participation, it becomes frozen and detached from reality. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): A writer’s work of classification ends when the text is produced, but reading, interpretation, and understanding remain open-ended tasks. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Hermeneutics became an independent discipline that both draws on and informs the human sciences; it engages theories of knowledge, being, and value, especially epistemology. YKHULI-TAJDID (هانز جيورج جادامر): Gadamer’s Truth and Method (1960) established hermeneutics as a powerful method, said to rival experimental science in importance for understanding the human reality of texts. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Hermeneutics developed schools and became a broad intellectual current with strong influence on cultural life and literary criticism. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author compares the Qur’an’s appearance in Arab civilization to philosophy’s appearance in the West: each was a decisive turn in outlook and method. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Hermeneutics rejects the gap between reader and text: meaning depends on the context of production and the recipient’s horizon, so it varies across times and places. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Interpretation makes the text living and renewable by placing responsibility on reading: the reader reshapes its raw material according to the cultural horizon of the present. YKHULI-TAJDID (أمين الخولي): Al-Khūlī argues that a reader’s personality, intellectual level, and mental horizon limit what the reader can understand from a text; Arabic’s rich resources permit many interpretive extensions. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author attributes the crisis of Islamic culture and Arab civilization to the failure of interpretation and renewal, followed by a long era of commentaries, glosses, and marginalia. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Renewing Qur’anic interpretation is necessary for the renewal and flourishing of Arab-Islamic thought, a goal pursued by Islamic thinkers since the Nahḍa began. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The author concludes that Al-Khūlī substantially achieved this renewalist aim. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Pre-revelation cultural inheritances persisted in Egypt through Pharaonic customs and the Coptic calendar, and other Muslim countries also retained pre-Qur’anic inheritances. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Despite those inheritances, the Qur’an quickly gathered them into a new civilizational phase that shaped the later historical course. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The Qur’an’s linguistic character makes authenticity a distinctive concern: language is the fabric of thought and consciousness, not a container for thought. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): The Qur’an’s linguistic force accompanied a kind of historical amnesia, as conquered peoples abandoned their national languages, which had embodied earlier social life and values. YKHULI-TAJDID (author): Islam presented itself as a continuation, development, and refinement of earlier revealed religions, especially Judaism and Christianity."}, {"id": "2:282/q83/p2", "position": "RIFAI-KHULI supplies interpretation context (c2).", "reasons": "RIFAI-KHULI (author): Classical tajdīd meant reviving neglected religious practice in its original form; Khuli instead defines renewal as development that discovers something new through ijtihād. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli rejected irrational claims that Arabic is uniquely perfect or complete: like other languages, it is a living social organism whose words die, arise, and develop through use. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Khuli traced the gap between written Classical Arabic and colloquial speech to early lexicographers privileging Bedouin usage and excluding common urban vocabulary. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author reads this account as showing Arabic's inherited Bedouin worldview and limited urban vocabulary; Abbasid Arabic then borrowed and coined terms to cover city life's new realities. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli held that developing beliefs is possible and now necessary, both because life requires it and to protect religion's continued relevance and compatibility with thought and action. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): He urged a new approach to unseen matters, rejecting excessive attribution of phenomena to the unseen and detailed speculation that scientific-minded younger generations cannot absorb. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli opposed ahistorical readings of heritage: each tradition is shaped by the particular temporal and spatial conditions of its period and changes as those conditions change. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): He applied gradual progression to material and immaterial life alike: forms begin simply, compete, and develop as what is fit survives and becomes more complex. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli described Islamic beliefs as developing from simple early forms to more complex ones as Muslims moved from Bedouin life into civilization and encountered learning and other peoples' thought; he contrasted the clear creed of the salaf with the interpretive creed of later scholars. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Khuli departed from the revivalist reform program associated with al-Tahtawi, al-Afghani, and Muhammad Abduh, which relied on inherited principles to restore earlier glory. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author regards Khuli's position as an early call for a new kalām: an age-responsive effort to interpret and justify belief, protecting faith from extremism and stagnation as well as defending it. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author interprets Khuli's historicity as the view that ideas resemble and arise from their environments: intellectually fertile settings generate complex thought, while poorer settings produce simpler ideas. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli insisted that renewal begins by thoroughly understanding the old and changing our role from guarding and sanctifying heritage to studying it critically. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author reads Khuli's 'killing' of the old as discernment, not destruction: identify inert inherited elements and understand how their concepts and questions restrict present life and future movement. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli allowed renewal to find new insight by drawing on existing old material, as well as by independent reasoning that produces something previously unknown. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author says Khuli sought to breathe new 
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
