<<chunk 38, part 1 of 0..5>>
life into old material after accreted misunderstanding had hardened it; he did not advocate discarding the entire past. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Khuli differed from reformers who repackaged old content in new forms and treated heritage as an exhaustive storehouse; he called for genuinely novel work. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli made evolution comprehensive across fundamentals, beliefs, worship, and transactions, extending reform beyond the commonly accepted scope of legal dealings; the author says including worship may be his distinctive position. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author notes that worship is conventionally treated as fixed by revelation, unlike transactions, but Khuli still urged reconsidering legal and theological works in light of changing realities. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli argued that new events absent from old fiqh books cannot halt the world's course; rigidity risks alienating ordinary people from a religion unable to address their lives. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli fashioned a different path for understanding religion and interpreting its texts, beyond inherited foundations and principles. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): In a discussion with the Shaykh al-Azhar, Khuli rejected restricting change to a few worship rulings and said Islamic law selects what is easier to practice and best suited to endure. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli raised whether worshippers could follow congregational Friday and festival prayers through televised broadcasts, seeing and hearing the imam when local mosques are crowded. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): For Khuli, transactions turn on public benefit wherever it exists; evolving the presentation of beliefs, worship, and transactions should keep religious life connected to ordinary life. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author says Khuli did not fully explain the basis or applications of evolving worship rulings and cautiously reads him as seeking easier performance of obligations through a broader use of hardship relief and secondary rulings. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author judges general calls to adapt fiqh insufficient unless scholars rebuild the underlying principles and inference rules so they can yield alternative rulings responsive to changing times and places. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli defended Darwinian biological evolution, finding comparable hierarchical classifications of beings in the Ikhwan al-Safa, Miskawayh, Avicenna, and Ibn Tufayl. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli regarded renewal at the head of each century as a major revolutionary work the community needs, almost a periodic social revolution. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): He extended evolution across theology, law, language, and all moral, intellectual, social, and spiritual dimensions of human life, treating it as a universal law rather than biology's specialty. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli analogized the emergence of new ideas to biological evolution: social conditions and proponents' conviction help new ideas outcompete old ones until they take root. RIFAI-KHULI (author): The author sees Khuli's appeal to modern science as a contemporary reformist strategy, but criticizes some thinkers for forcing scientific theories onto the Qur'an until it seems to lack independent content."}, {"id": "2:282/q83/p3", "position": "RIFAI-KHULI supplies interpretation context (c6).", "reasons": "RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai treats a book as its own interpretive key: Qur'anic verses illuminate one another, but readers cannot attain complete neutrality because their formation and assumptions shape interpretation. RIFAI-KHULI (author): An exegete's field colors interpretation: a theologian produces kalam-oriented tafsir, a jurist legal tafsir, a Sufi mystical tafsir, and a literary scholar literary tafsir. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai stresses that even Qur'an-by-Qur'an exegesis is shaped by hidden assumptions when an interpreter chooses one verse or word to explain another. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli describes reciprocal effects between an exegete's worldview, specialized knowledge, and interpretation; connecting disciplines to tafsir can enrich those disciplines too. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai argues that applying disciplines in new fields helps them develop by exposing gaps, defects, and errors. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai says Khuli's position does not entail relativism; it frees Qur'anic meaning from exegetes' errors and treats their readings as historically conditioned rather than eternally authoritative. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai says Muhammad Ahmad Khalaf Allah embodied Khuli's reformist method, while Aisha Abd al-Rahman remained attached to inherited tafsir and did not adopt modern hermeneutics. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai suggests Bint al-Shati avoided departing from inherited methods out of fear after Khalaf Allah's dissertation drew fierce attacks; he adds that she may not have grasped Khuli's critique of inherited tafsir. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai argues that reform is emotionally and materially costly and requires courage to challenge convention. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai cites Muhammad Rashid Rida's Salafi turn after Muhammad Abduh's death as another example of students reverting to inherited tradition rather than following a reformist teacher. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli says interpreters color a text, especially a literary one: a reader's personality sets its intellectual level and the horizon within which its meaning is understood. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli describes readers as pulling a phrase in different directions and drawing from it only what their intellectual capacity permits; language's figurative range enables this coloring. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai suspects Khuli borrowed the image of coloring text from Junayd's saying that water takes its vessel's color, and sees Sufi and gnostic methods as valuable resources beyond inherited tafsir and legal theory. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli holds that interpreters' personalities mark every method and era of exegesis, whether transmitted or reasoned, despite claims of detachment and objectivity. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): Khuli rejects the claim that transmitted exegesis escapes the interpreter's personal imprint simply because it explains verses through reports without overt intervention. RIFAI-KHULI (أمين الخولي): For Khuli, a narrator's choice to gather reports that seem relevant to a verse, and to accept or reject them, exposes the interpreter's horizon and prior assumptions. RIFAI-KHULI (author): Al-Rifai draws the consequence that transmitted tafsir is a form of opinion-based exegesis, and even Qur'an-by-Qur'an interpretation depends on the interpreter's selection of verses and words."}, {"id": "2:282/q83/p4", "position": "ITQAN supplies interpretation context (v4p496).", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): Al-Bukhari often cites Ibn Abi Talha’s Ibn Abbas tafsir through Abu Salih; al-Tabari, Ibn Abi Hatim, and Ibn al-Mundhir transmit it through intermediaries. ITQAN (author): The tafsir of Ata ibn Dinar may be recorded and used as evidence. ITQAN (author): The tafsir of Abu Ruwq, about one part, was judged sound. ITQAN (author): Al-Suddi’s tafsir has chains to Ibn Masud and Ibn Abbas; although leading imams narrated from al-Suddi, Asbat ibn Nasr’s compilation is disputed, yet al-Suyuti calls it the best tafsir. ITQAN (الخليلي): Ibn Jurayj did not aim to authenticate his tafsir and included both sound and weak reports for each verse. ITQAN (الخليلي): Maqatil ibn Sulayman was considered weak, though he met senior Successors and al-Shafi'i indicated his tafsir was usable. ITQAN (قوم): Some say Ibn Abi Talha did not hear Ibn Abbas’s tafsir and instead received it from Mujahid or Sa'id ibn Jubayr. ITQAN (الخليلي): Al-Khalili describes the Ibn Abbas tafsir as transmitted from Ali ibn Abi Talha through Mu'awiya ibn Salih and Abu Salih, the scribe of al-Layth. ITQAN (الحفاظ): Hadith critics agree Ibn Abi Talha did not hear directly from Ibn Abbas; long tafsirs attributed to Ibn Abbas with unknown transmitters are not acceptable, such as Juyaybir from al-Dahhak. ITQAN (author): The longest Ibn Jurayj tafsir route, through Bakr ibn Sahl, Abd al-Ghani ibn Sa'id, and Musa ibn Muhammad, is questionable. ITQAN (author): Shibl ibn Abbad’s tafsir, through Ibn Abi Najih from Mujahid from Ibn Abbas, is close to sound."}, {"id": "2:282/q83/p5", "position": "SAMIN-DURR supplies interpretation context (2:282 #21).", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (ابن عباس ومجاهد وطاووس): The passive interpretation is also transmitted in tafsir from Ibn Abbas and the other named authorities."}, {"id": "2:282/q83/p6", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p70).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Discussion of the Quran’s name, verses, suras, ordering, and titles directly serves tafsir, especially interpretation of sura openings and connections, and avoids repeated exposition."}]}
{"id": "2:282/q84", "question": "What wider legal or ethical examples accompany the verse?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q84/p1", "position": "JISHUMI supplies law context (v2p1078).", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Jurists unanimously permit debts in fungible goods such as currency, wheat, and barley. JISHUMI (author): Acknowledgments are accepted and acted upon, and testimony can be given about them just as about deferred debts. JISHUMI (أهل العراق): Iraqi jurists accept the acknowledgment of a financially profligate person after interdiction. JISHUMI (الأكثر): Most jurists disallow deferred debt in nonfungible goods such as animals and clothing. JISHUMI (بعضهم): Some jurists permit deferred debt in nonfungible goods. JISHUMI (author): Jurists agree that obligations owed on liability may have a deferred term; specific assets cannot be deferred. JISHUMI (author): A debt is legally due even though the demand for payment is deferred."}, {"id": "2
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
