<<chunk 39, part 2 of 0..10>>
 could not remind one woman if she erred, and found no answer. STUDYQURAN (Q): A seller must own production means and specify the product’s attributes, quantity, delivery time, and feasible place of delivery. STUDYQURAN (Q): The buyer should pay fungible or monetary material because agricultural sellers lack liquid wealth and hold assets not easily converted to money."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p21", "position": "TAB-FULL supplies interpretation context (v5p98).", "reasons": "TAB-FULL (عامر): ʿĀmir says a witness may choose freely until he has testified. TAB-FULL (الحسن): Al-Ḥasan says a person who dislikes an initial invitation to testify may decline it. TAB-FULL (إبراهيم): Ibrāhīm says a person afraid of forgetting may decline an initial request to testify. TAB-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): Saʿīd ibn Jubayr understands the verse to concern witnesses who have already testified."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p22", "position": "NAHHAS supplies interpretation context (v1p343).", "reasons": "NAHHAS (author): The lām is present in وليكتب for the absent third person and omitted in فاكتبوه for the addressees; omitting it in second-person commands is common and preferable. NAHHAS (محمد بن يزيد): Ibn Yazid says a third-person command must retain its lām. NAHHAS (سيبويه والكوفيون): Sibawayh and the Kufans allow omission of the lām in a third-person command and cite a verse addressed to Muhammad. NAHHAS (author): The Hijazis and Banu Asad say يملي; Tamim says أمليت. The Qurʾan uses both language forms."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p23", "position": "THALABI supplies interpretation context (v2p294).", "reasons": "THALABI (بعضهم): Some read the summons command as requiring people to accept the burden of serving as witnesses. THALABI (عطاء وعطية): Ata and Atiyya take the summons as recommendation, leaving a person free whether or not to testify. THALABI (author): The construction places cause before effect, like the cited verse whose sense is that they would ask for a messenger if calamity struck them. | mentions 28:47 THALABI (author): Dhakkara and adhkara can both mean remind, like the paired forms nuzzila/anzala and karuma/akrama; a poem uses the sun as a reminder."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p24", "position": "JISHUMI supplies interpretation context (v2p1070 #2).", "reasons": "JISHUMI (العامة): The common reading has the imperative lām in وليكتب with sukūn. JISHUMI (زيد بن أسلم): Zayd ibn Aslam reads فتذاكر with an alif, as reciprocal discussion. JISHUMI (author): The light and doubled forms are both Arabic usage, like dhakkara/adhkara and nazzala/anzala. JISHUMI (عاصم والجحدري): ʿĀṣim and al-Jaḥdarī read تضل with passive morphology, ḍamma on the yāʾ and fatḥ on the ḍād."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p25", "position": "JISHUMI supplies interpretation context (v2p1075).", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Writing is emphasized because scribes were few in the Prophet’s time. JISHUMI (مالك والأوزاعي والشافعي): Mālik, al-Awzāʿī, and al-Shāfiʿī restrict the male-and-two-women arrangement to financial matters. JISHUMI (الشعبي): Al-Shaʿbī describes a trustworthy witness as one not accused in matters of appetite or sexual conduct. JISHUMI (author): Mussammā means that the term is stated and known."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p26", "position": "KASHSHAF-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p356).", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Some creditors trust a debtor because of their good opinion of him. KASHSHAF-FULL (أبي): Ubayy reads the passive ‘if the debtor is trusted,’ describing a person known for reliability, fulfillment, and independence from collateral. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The debtor should honor the creditor’s trust by repaying the entrusted debt; it is called trust because the creditor relied on him without collateral. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): The phrase has alternative pronunciations; ʿĀṣim’s assimilation in ittaman is rejected because its yāʾ derives from hamza and remains hamza-like."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p27", "position": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL supplies interpretation context (v2p721).", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (رؤبة): Ruʾba's verse about Arwā paying some debts and delaying others illustrates dāyantu as lending or dealing in debt. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (الأعشى): Al-Aʿshā's verse uses rahīna for something pledged, and the author notes rahantu lisānī is said for pledging one's word, not arhantu. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Dāntuhu means I sold to him on credit; adantu means I borrowed on credit. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): Ṣaghīr is the active participle of ṣaghura and means small in amount, also used for abstract things."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p28", "position": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL supplies interpretation context (v2p748).", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The forms شهيد and كاتب shift from an active participle pattern to an intensive pattern. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The verse uses fronting, delay, and ellipsis: writing precedes dictation, and the witness phrases imply the omitted relation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): A long series of commands, safeguards, warnings, and reminders emphatically protects wealth in transactions from loss and breach of trust. ABUHAYYAN-FULL (author): The Prophet paired safeguarding wealth with safeguarding lives and bloodshed."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p29", "position": "SAMIN-DURR supplies interpretation context (2:282 #14).", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (الفارسي): Al-Farisi analyzes إحدى as an irregular feminine of الواحد; the author prefers it as the regular feminine of أحد, paired in eleven and twenty-one. SAMIN-DURR (أبو العباس): إحدى pluralizes as إحد, like كسرة/كسر, because its final alif functions like feminine tāʾ; similar patterns include الكبرى/كبر and قصعاء/قواصع. SAMIN-DURR (author): إحدى is used only in annexation, unlike its masculine counterpart أحد. SAMIN-DURR (author): الأخرى is feminine of comparative آخر and can mean آخرة, as in 7:38; both forms pluralize أخر, but their declension and meanings differ. | mentions 7:38"}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p30", "position": "SAMIN-DURR supplies interpretation context (2:282 #20).", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR (author): One possible omitted subject of kāna is ‘transaction,’ understood from the preceding commands; Sibawayh gives a similar contextual ellipsis. SAMIN-DURR (author): A poem using ‘when there was stabbing and embracing’ supplies an omitted ‘matter’ as the subject of kāna. SAMIN-DURR (author): The author analyzes the fāʾ as conjunction to the whole exception clause, with clear causal force: the immediate transaction explains the dispensation. SAMIN-DURR (author): ‘That you do not write it’ means ‘in not writing it’; the preposition is omitted, leaving the two constructions discussed for an infinitive after its deletion."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p31", "position": "IBNKATHIR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p23).", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathīr says al-Bukhārī’s point is that the Qurʾan was revealed in Quraysh’s language, and Quraysh were the foremost branch of the Arabs. IBNKATHIR-FULL (عمر بن الخطاب): Another report says ʿUmar instructed his committee to use the language of Muḍar when linguistic differences arose, because the Qurʾan came in the language of a man from Muḍar, the Prophet. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathīr cites verses describing the Qurʾan as Arabic and revealed in clear Arabic as evidence for its language, also citing the challenge about a non-Arabic Qurʾan. | mentions 39:28, 26:192, 26:193, 26:194, 26:195, 16:103, 41:44 IBNKATHIR-FULL (يعلى بن أمية): Yaʿlā b. Umayya wished to witness revelation; when a man in iḥrām wearing perfume and a cloak asked about ʿumra, ʿUmar brought Yaʿlā close to observe the Prophet receive revelation, after which the Prophet ordered the cloak removed and perfume washed away."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p32", "position": "BURHAN supplies interpretation context (v1p332).", "reasons": "BURHAN (شيخ المالكية): The Maliki shaykh forbids anomalous readings in prayer or elsewhere, even for readers ignorant of Arabic; the uninformed are taught, while knowing or persistent readers are disciplined. BURHAN (شيخ المالكية): He says replacing Qur’anic words such as آتينا and سولت with synonyms is not a variant reading but an even graver offense, deserving stronger discipline and prohibition. BURHAN (الشيخ شهاب الدين): Shihab al-Din dislikes repeatedly reciting a verse with different readings as some contemporaries do during a Qur’an completion, calling it an innovation without early precedent. BURHAN (ابن عبد البر): Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr transmits Muslim consensus that anomalous readings may not be recited and that one should not pray behind someone who uses them."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p33", "position": "ITQAN supplies interpretation context (v4p496).", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): Al-Tabari often cites al-Suddi through several routes; Ibn Abi Hatim omits this compilation to restrict himself to the soundest reports, while al-Hakim authenticates some reports through Murra from Ibn Masud and others. ITQAN (ابن حجر): Ibn Hajar answers that the intermediary is known and trustworthy, so the missing direct hearing causes no problem. ITQAN (author): Muhammad ibn Thawr’s transmission from Ibn Jurayj comprises about three large parts and was judged sound. ITQAN (author): Hajjaj ibn Muhammad’s one-part transmission from Ibn Jurayj is sound and agreed upon."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p34", "position": "ALUSI-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p21 #2).", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (قائل غير مسمى): The excerpt recalls a report that the Quran was being written on parchments in the Prophet's presence; the speaker is not identified in this continuation. ALUSI-FULL (زيد بن ثابت): While copying, Zayd noticed a missing verse of al-Ahzab that he had heard the Prophet recite; they found it with Khuzayma and inserted it in its surah. | mentions 33:23 ALUSI-FULL (author): The claim that the two witnesses meant one person who memorized the text and another who had it written has no basis. ALUSI-FULL (author): Reports that Ali stayed behind after the Prophet's death to compile the Quran include weak and fa
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
