<<chunk 39, part 1 of 0..10>>
 Those who follow the Qur'an attain success, while those who turn away after hearing it incur loss. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): The Qur'an commands and forbids, gives glad tidings and warnings, offers admonitions, recounts past peoples for reflection, presents parables, and points to signs of divine oneness for contemplation. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): Early scholars wrote books on Qur'anic sciences according to their understanding and knowledge; Baghawī thanks God for their efforts and asks mercy for them all."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p11", "position": "KASHSHAF-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p354 #2).", "reasons": "KASHSHAF-FULL (author): ‘If you do so’ means if you harm one another; alternatively, it means doing anything forbidden in the passage. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): On a journey means while travelling. KASHSHAF-FULL (ابن عباس): Ibn ʿAbbās and Ubayy read kitāban; Ibn ʿAbbās asks what if a scribe is found but paper and ink are not. KASHSHAF-FULL (author): Abū al-ʿĀliya reads kutuban; al-Ḥasan’s kitāban is glossed as the plural of kātib. KASHSHAF-FULL (مجاهد والضحاك): Mujāhid and al-Ḍaḥḥāk restrict pledging to travel by the apparent wording and require possession; Mālik validates it by offer and acceptance without possession."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p12", "position": "QURTUBI-FULL supplies interpretation context (2:282 #8).", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL (أنس بن مالك): He reports that a mentally impaired trader's family asked the Prophet to interdict him; the Prophet stopped him from selling, then allowed him to trade only if he said there was no deception. Al-Tirmidhī calls the report sound. QURTUBI-FULL (البخاري): His historical record gives a related wording requiring the trader to say there is no deception and granting three nights' option on each purchase. QURTUBI-FULL (author): The trader was Habban ibn Munqidh, though another account calls Munqidh the grandfather of Yahya and Wasiʿ; he lived 130 years and a battle wound to his head impaired his mind and speech. QURTUBI-FULL (ابن عمر): Al-Dāraquṭnī transmits that Habban had poor sight and a head wound, so the Prophet gave him three days' option; his impaired speech rendered لا خلابة as لا خذابة. QURTUBI-FULL (author): He prefers interdiction under this verse and the family's request; the Prophet's concession was specific to Habban because he insisted on trading, while someone ordinarily cheated—especially through mental impairment—should be interdicted."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p13", "position": "ITQAN supplies interpretation context (v1p130).", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): The response says Qasim’s objection does not weaken Ibn Qutayba: the listed variation types may have arisen incidentally and been recognized by induction. ITQAN (عياض): Qadi ʿIyad and followers take seven as a nonliteral number signifying ease, latitude, and abundance, as seven, seventy, and seven hundred can mean many. ITQAN (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Ibn Abbas report in both Sahihs supports an actual count: Gabriel began with one mode, and the Prophet kept asking for more until there were seven. ITQAN (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A Nasaʾi wording has Gabriel and Michael ask the Prophet to keep requesting more until the allowance reaches seven. ITQAN (author): A fourth view says each word may have one or more readings up to seven, but this is challenged because some words have more than seven."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p14", "position": "ALUSI-FULL supplies interpretation context (v3p56 #2).", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL (ابن الفرس): Ibn al-Faras infers that guardians may not be unbelievers or sinners but may be enslaved or women because the verse requires only justice; al-Alusi dismisses this inference. ALUSI-FULL (author): The person owing the debt must dictate because that person is the one against whom a claim is made and must acknowledge it; attaching the command to that description implies a restriction to the debtor. ALUSI-FULL (author): Pairing God's majestic name with 'his Lord' combines majesty and gracious care to intensify the debtor's admonition to fear God. ALUSI-FULL (سعيد بن جبير): The prohibition on reducing any part of the dictated debt, even a small amount, is the transmitted interpretation from Saʿīd b. Jubayr; variant readings omit or double the hamza in shayʾan. ALUSI-FULL (author): Minhu can attach directly to 'reduce,' with min marking origin, or be a fronted circumstantial phrase; shayʾan can be its object or a cognate accusative."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p15", "position": "ELMALILI supplies interpretation context (2:282 #2).", "reasons": "ELMALILI (author): Someone who recorded an event, later forgot it, and then recalls it clearly by consulting the record may testify. ELMALILI (author): Someone who only knows they made a record but still cannot recall the event must not testify. ELMALILI (author): Witnesses should not be prompted; one who has forgotten should be able to remember independently. ELMALILI (author): It is unjust to compel women to record events or, after a human lapse of memory, to make them recover recollection through outside prompts. ELMALILI (author): For matters men cannot witness, women’s reports alone may suffice, sometimes even one woman’s report, as with an incident in a women’s bath or a midwife’s report of birth."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p16", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p115).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): A human trying to compose a medium-length sura would need prolonged revision and still leave awkward sentences; the Quran’s fluent composition entails no such labor. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Stylistic variety shows divine origin because literary geniuses usually excel in only one or two styles, and intensifies the challenge by denying opponents the excuse that they had not tried a given style. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur cites the statement that only God and those firmly grounded in knowledge know its interpretation as an example of the Quran’s layered meanings and allusions to causes and purposes. | mentions 3:7 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur calls tafannun the artful movement between topics through parenthesis, analogy, conclusion, varied synonyms, and frequent grammatical shifts, before returning to the main subject and renewing attention. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The two parables of hypocrites, the fire and the rainstorm, exemplify this movement between styles and topics. | mentions 2:17, 2:18, 2:19, 2:20"}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p17", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p56).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (ابن عبد البر): Ibn Abd al-Barr explains the seven as contextual latitude to substitute a fitting divine attribute, such as حكيم for عليم, while preserving contextual propriety after punishment or mercy passages. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur rejects that categorical account as mismatched with the hadith’s transmitted context of concession and ease, and says its forced sevenfold classifications do not withstand objection. IBNASHUR-FULL (أبو بكر بن العربي): Ibn al-Arabi says the license lasted through the Prophet’s life, implying abrogation after his death either by the Companions’ consensus or prophetic instruction. IBNASHUR-FULL (عمر): Abrogation proponents cite Umar’s statement that the Quran was revealed in Quraysh speech and his ban on Ibn Masud’s Hudhayl form of حتى. | mentions 37:174 IBNASHUR-FULL (بعضهم): Another enumeration includes Quraysh, Banu Darim, and the upper Hawazin clans Sa'd, Jusham, and Nasr ibn Muawiya, plus Thaqif; some substitute Khuza'a for Tamim."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p18", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p70).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Quran is God’s Arabic speech revealed to Muhammad through Gabriel, whose task is to convey to the community the wording revealed to him. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The community acts on the revealed wording and recites what it can in prayer; reciting the Quran is itself worship. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Quran proves the Messenger’s claim for all people by challenging its first Arab hearers to produce something comparable, which they failed to do. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The challenge descends from ten suras, to one sura, to an explicit warning that they could never produce one; Ibn Ashur also cites the Quran’s answer to demands for a sign. | mentions 11:13, 11:14, 10:38, 10:39, 2:23, 2:24, 29:50, 29:51 IBNASHUR-FULL (محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم): The Prophet says each prophet received signs through which people believed, while his own gift was revelation; Ibn Ashur notes further meanings are discussed in his Bukhari commentary."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p19", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p73).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): God ordered the Prophet to write all revelation as proof for converts who had not received it by memorizing it in their hearts. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Prophet appointed companions to record revelation from its beginning; Ibn Ashur names Abdullah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, Abdullah ibn Amr, Zayd ibn Thabit, and Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Dhikr means a reminder of what people must believe and do; in the cited verse, the Prophet is to explain that reminder to people. | mentions 16:44 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Wahy is named for the angel’s delivery to the Prophet, which conveys God’s intent like translated human speech; its compositions were not made by humans. | mentions 21:45 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Quran is also called God’s speech, as in the command to shelter a polytheist until he hears the speech of God. | mentions 9:6"}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p20", "position": "STUDYQURAN supplies interpretation context (2:282).", "reasons": "STUDYQURAN (author): This is the Quran’s longest single verse. STUDYQURAN (author): Some commentators infer women’s essential inability to judge objectively and intrinsic unreliability as witnesses. STUDYQURAN (Abū Bakr ibn ʿArabī): In Aḥkām al-Qur’ān he wondered why one man
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
