<<chunk 39, part 0 of 0..10>>
{"id": "2:282/q85", "question": "What other contextual material accompanies the verse?", "turns_on": "The notes offer different readings, referents, grounds, or applications.", "positions": [{"id": "2:282/q85/p1", "position": "ITQAN supplies interpretation context (v4p453).", "reasons": "ITQAN (ابن سيرين): Ibn Sirin disliked extending the basmala’s initial baʾ through the mim before writing the sin. ITQAN (author): Writing the Qur’an with an impure substance is forbidden; writing it in gold is considered good by al-Ghazali. ITQAN (ابن عباس): Ibn Abbas, Abu Dharr, and Abu al-Dardaʾ are reported to have disliked writing the Qur’an in gold. ITQAN (علي): A second report says Ali disliked writing the Qur’an on a small object. ITQAN (علي): Ali told Abu Hakim al-Abdi to sharpen his pen; after he trimmed it, Ali approved and said to illuminate the script as God had illuminated it. ITQAN (علي): A report attributed to Ali says a person who carefully embellishes the basmala is forgiven. ITQAN (رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم): A raised report from Anas promises forgiveness to anyone who writes the basmala beautifully. ITQAN (عمر بن عبد العزيز): ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAziz instructed his officials to extend the word الرحمن when writing the basmala."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p2", "position": "IBNASHUR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p128).", "reasons": "IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The Quran associates knowledge with light and life, illustrating the point with verses describing the living, emergence from darkness to light, learned understanding, and the learned versus ignorant. | mentions 36:70, 2:257, 29:43, 39:9 IBNASHUR-FULL (author): For Arabs, the Quran’s sciences were inaccessible before its revelation; Ibn Ashur cites the statement that neither Muhammad nor his people knew them beforehand. | mentions 11:49 IBNASHUR-FULL (الشاطبي): Al-Shatibi says Quranic meanings and interpretation must stay within what is customary among Arabs. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur suggests al-Shatibi may have been avoiding difficult objections economically, but asks how this view can deny the Quran’s continuing miracle to later peoples. IBNASHUR-FULL (محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم): The authentic report says every prophet received signs that people believed because of, while Muhammad’s gift was revelation and he hoped for the greatest following. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Unlike earlier action miracles such as the staff, water from stone, and healing, Muhammad’s miracle is the Quran’s wording and meanings, beyond human imitation and available for study in every age. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): The fa of فأرجو marks a consequence: only a miracle lasting across ages explains the Prophet’s hope for the largest following, since generations with different capacities can recognize it; followers means adherents to true religion, not mere affiliation. IBNASHUR-FULL (author): Ibn Ashur suggests the Prophet’s hope may mean more followers than all the other prophets combined, and says this has in fact occurred in true religious adherence."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p3", "position": "MAWARDI-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p355).", "reasons": "MAWARDI-FULL (أهل الكوفة): An tadilla means “lest one of them err.” MAWARDI-FULL (أهل البصرة): An tadilla means “because one of them might err.” MAWARDI-FULL (عطاء وعطية العوفي): Answering the summons is recommended, not obligatory. MAWARDI-FULL (الشعبي): Answering the summons is a communal obligation. MAWARDI-FULL (قتادة والربيع): Answering the summons is an individual obligation. MAWARDI-FULL (author): The two men must be from your religious community. MAWARDI-FULL (مجاهد): The two men may be required to be free persons."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p4", "position": "DURR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v2p123).", "reasons": "DURR-FULL (الحسن): God grants a servant occupation with Him and withdrawal to Him when He knows obedience is the servant's prevailing commitment. DURR-FULL (سفيان): Whoever acts on what he knows is granted success in what he does not know. DURR-FULL (النبي): The Prophet says that whoever acts on what he knows will inherit knowledge of what he did not know. DURR-FULL (النبي): When Yazid ibn Salama feared forgetting the many hadiths he had heard, the Prophet gave him a comprehensive instruction: fear God regarding what you know. DURR-FULL (عبد الله بن سلام): Ibn Salam tells ʿUmar that learned people are those who practice what they know, and that greed removes knowledge from people's hearts. DURR-FULL (جابر بن عبد الله): Jabir advises learning silence, patience, knowledge, acting on knowledge, and then spreading it. DURR-FULL (زياد بن جدير): Ziyad ibn Judayr says a people have not truly understood unless they attain piety."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p5", "position": "JISHUMI supplies interpretation context (v2p1071).", "reasons": "JISHUMI (author): Safah means ignorance, with its root sense being lightness; the term describes a lightness of intellect. JISHUMI (author): Ibaʾ means refusing or refraining from something, as in Iblis's refusal. | mentions 2:34 JISHUMI (author): Irtiyāb is doubt arising from suspicion. JISHUMI (السلمي): Al-Sulami reads لا يسأموا with yāʾ, referring back to the preceding past context. JISHUMI (author): The phrase may instead be accusative, with an implied command to summon one man and two women as witnesses. JISHUMI (العامة): The common reading has the accusative and gemination; its form derives from لا تضارر with two r's assimilated."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p6", "position": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA supplies interpretation context (v1p295).", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (علي بن عبيد الله): Al-Dīn is what a person undertakes; religious commitment means undertaking what God requires. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (غيره): Another definition makes religion divine speech that disciplines the self and restrains natural impulses. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (ابن قتيبة): Ibn Qutayba derives God’s dīn from this sense of domination and submission. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (القطامي): Al-Quṭāmī’s line uses tadīnuka for making someone submissive. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): A second cited line also uses dīn for an authority or condition of subjugation. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA (author): Dīn can mean worship, as shown by a poem asking whether this is always his and the speaker’s religion."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p7", "position": "IBNKATHIR-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p10).", "reasons": "IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): When an explanation is absent from the Qurʾan, Sunna, and Companions, many imams turn to the Successors; Ibn Kathīr names Mujāhid, Saʿīd b. Jubayr, ʿIkrima, ʿAṭāʾ, al-Ḥasan, and others. IBNKATHIR-FULL (ابن أبي مليكة): Ibn Abī Mulayka says he saw Mujāhid ask Ibn ʿAbbās for the Qurʾan’s interpretation with writing tablets; Ibn ʿAbbās told him to write until he had asked about all of it. IBNKATHIR-FULL (سفيان الثوري): Sufyān al-Thawrī regarded an interpretation transmitted from Mujāhid as sufficient. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Apparent differences in Successor wording often are not real disagreements: one may state an implication or equivalent, while another states the point directly. IBNKATHIR-FULL (author): Ibn Kathīr agrees Successor opinions do not bind those who disagree, but consensus is evidence; where they differ, none overrides another, so consult Qurʾanic usage, Sunna, Arabic usage, and Companions’ views. IBNKATHIR-FULL (النبي): A report from Ibn ʿAbbās attributes to the Prophet a warning that whoever interprets the Qurʾan by opinion or without knowledge should take his seat in the Fire; Ibn Kathīr cites it to prohibit such tafsīr."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p8", "position": "ITQAN supplies interpretation context (v1p163).", "reasons": "ITQAN (author): Zayd’s collection report lists palm midribs and small stones, with variant reports adding patches, leather, shoulder bones, ribs, and saddle wood. ITQAN (author): ʿAsab are palm midribs; scribes stripped off the leaflets and wrote on the broad end. ITQAN (الخطابي): Lihaf are small stones; al-Khattabi further describes them as slabs of stone. ITQAN (author): Riqāʿ are patches made of leather, parchment, or paper. ITQAN (author): Aktaf are camel or sheep shoulder bones, which were dried before writing on them. ITQAN (author): Aqtāb are wooden saddle frames placed on a camel’s back for riding."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p9", "position": "SAMARRAI-ASRAR supplies interpretation context.", "reasons": "SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): A Qur’anic story has several lessons and evidentiary uses; it is not literally repeated, since each occurrence brings forward the aspect suited to its context and purpose. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): The story of Moses shows that God’s decree cannot be altered: Pharaoh killed Israelite boys to prevent his downfall, yet raised in his own house the person destined to end his rule. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Moses’ story also displays the terrible end of Pharaoh as the consequence of injustice and unjust rulers. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): The Israelites’ formation in humiliation, cowardice, and worldliness explains their resistance to Moses’ reform; after forty years in the wilderness that generation died and a differently formed generation emerged. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): Once known and believed, truth has irresistible power against enticement and threat, shown by the sorcerers’ belief in Moses and the faith of Pharaoh’s wife. SAMARRAI-ASRAR (author): The Qur’an adapts each story to its context by omitting some details, expanding or summarizing others, changing sequence, and varying expression without changing the meaning."}, {"id": "2:282/q85/p10", "position": "BAGHAWI-FULL supplies interpretation context (v1p33).", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL (author): God sent Muḥammad with guidance and the true religion as mercy to all, glad tidings for believers, and warning for opponents; through him prophethood was completed, the message sealed, and noble character perfected. BAGHAWI-FULL (author): God's Qur'an is a light that guides people away from error and saves them from ignorance. BAGHAWI-FULL (author):
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
