<<chunk 49, part 1 of 0..5>>
c hair for either sex, and menstruation or pregnancy for women. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Puberty has five signs: wet dream, a specified age, and coarse pubic hair for both sexes; menstruation and pregnancy are further signs for women. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Passing a test alone does not end guardianship: the verse also requires reaching marriageable age before the estate is released. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Reaching marriageable age means puberty, as shown by the Quran's parallel phrase about children reaching puberty; puberty can be established by five signs, three shared by both sexes and menstruation and pregnancy specific to women. | mentions 24:59 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الزهري وعطاء: Al-Zuhri, Ata, al-Shafi'i, and some Malikis say no penalty applies before a wet dream, apparently assigning no legal force to age or pubic hair. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · داود: Dawud says age never establishes puberty without a wet dream, even if someone reaches forty. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Someone who has reached puberty is expected to seek a livelihood, since the verse sets reaching marriageable age as a threshold. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa sets puberty at eighteen; bulūgh al-nikāḥ euphemistically means maturity and suitability for marriage in his view. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: بلغوا النكاح elliptically means reaching the age or time for marriage. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: On the majority analysis, idhā is governed by the sense of its answer: when they reach marriageable age mature, hand over their property. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · مجاهد: Mujahid glosses reaching marriageable age as reaching puberty. BURHAN, d. 794 · author: Nikāḥ generally means marriage, but in this verse it denotes puberty. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians should regularly test orphans' religious and financial judgment during adolescence until they reach marriageable age, by puberty or age. ITQAN, d. 911 · ابن فارس: Nikāḥ usually means marriage, but in 4:6 it means puberty. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Reaching marriage age means puberty, when a person becomes eligible for marriage. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Reaching marriageable age means puberty, through a wet dream or age; fifteen is the limit for al-Shafiʿi, Abu Yusuf, Muhammad, and a transmitted Hanafi position adopted in the school. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The common arrival at marriageable fitness by fifteen supports that age; al-Bayhaqi himself calls weak the report from Anas that property records and legal penalties begin at fifteen. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Reaching marriageable age means ordinary physical maturity that prompts marriage, not an early marriage arranged for incidental reasons. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Ibtalā means testing; reaching the age of marriage means reaching its appropriate time, a rational metaphor for maturity. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: The guardian's testing begins when a child can distinguish and continues until marriage age, since sound judgment emerges through repeated trials over time. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Marriage age is the basis for personal legal capacity in worship and similar duties, but financial dealings and admissions also require rushd to protect inexperienced orphans from fraud. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: Orphan property is delivered only after both marriageable age and actual financial maturity, since either can occur before the other; jurists differ on age from fifteen to nineteen and on separate ages by sex, and a state may select and legislate one view."}, {"id": "4:6/q07/p3", "position": "Here reaching nikāḥ means physical sexual maturity", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · بعض المفسرين: Nikah means sexual intercourse in 2:230. | mentions 2:230 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · بعض المفسرين: In this verse, nikah means puberty or reaching sexual maturity. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Reaching the age of marriage means puberty, identified by emission, as in 24:59; it is when legal accountability and penalties begin, and the label refers to the emission involved in intercourse. | mentions 24:59"}, {"id": "4:6/q07/p4", "position": "Nikāḥ can denote the marriage contract", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · الأعشى: Al-Aʿsha's line uses nikah for a captive woman who had been sexually possessed without dowry or contract. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · بعض المفسرين: Nikah means the contract in 2:221, 4:3, 4:25, and 33:49. | mentions 2:221, 4:3, 4:25, 33:49 IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · بعض المفسرين: Nikah denotes both contract and intercourse in 4:22. | mentions 4:22"}, {"id": "4:6/q07/p5", "position": "Nikāḥ literally denotes intercourse, with contract as an extended sense", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · المفضل: Nikah originally meant sexual intercourse; the term later expanded to include the marriage contract. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · أبو عمر غلام ثعلب: Reporting Thaʿlab from the Kufans and al-Mubarrad from the Basrans, he says the root means joining two things and can also mean intercourse without a contract. IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · القاضي أبو يعلى: Nikah may denote a contract in 33:49, but intercourse is literal and contract figurative because it leads to intercourse. | mentions 33:49"}]}
{"id": "4:6/q08", "question": "What establishes puberty for this ruling?", "turns_on": "Whether physical signs or a fixed age establish legal adulthood, and which signs count.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q08/p1", "position": "Puberty has several physical and age indicators", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · بعض المفسرين: In this verse, nikah means puberty or reaching sexual maturity. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · author: Removal of an orphan’s legal restraint depends on both puberty and maturity; guardians must test them and deliver their property once maturity is clear. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Because 4:2 ordered guardians to hand over orphan property, this verse specifies when: both puberty and discerned sound judgment must be established before delivery. | mentions 4:2 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Once puberty and discerned judgment are both present, guardians must hand over the property; no separate complete-intellect condition is stated because judgment already entails more than basic reason. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أكثر العلماء: Most scholars, including Malik, say sound judgment follows puberty; a person who remains imprudent stays under guardianship even when old. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Property is delivered only when both sound judgment and puberty are present; most jurists agree, while Abu Hanifa, Zufar, and al-Nakha'i release a person at twenty-five without requiring sound judgment. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Someone who has reached puberty is expected to seek a livelihood, since the verse sets reaching marriageable age as a threshold. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Deliver property promptly at puberty only if maturity is observed; the conditional grammar makes maturity a prerequisite. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa gives property after seven years beyond puberty even without observed maturity, since it is a period of change when a child begins to discern and is ordered to worship. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Reaching marriage means puberty, when a person becomes fit for marriage and its purpose of procreation. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The verse does not specify the legal age or the signs of puberty; juristic works discuss those questions. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عطية، مالك: Ibn Atiyya and Malik require both puberty and discernment before property is handed over. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The prohibition on consuming or wasting the estate is an independent sentence, not coordinated with the command to hand it over, which follows the puberty condition. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Most grammarians make ḥattā a conjunction marking the endpoint of testing: test orphans until puberty, then give them their wealth if they show maturity. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · مجاهد: Mujahid glosses reaching marriageable age as reaching puberty. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · علي بن أبي طالب: Ali quotes the Prophet: legal orphanhood ends at puberty, and a fast is not to be maintained in silence until night. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · سعيد بن جبير: Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Ibn Abbas, al-Hasan, and other authorities explain discernment as sound religion and protection of wealth; jurists end guardianship when a boy reaches puberty with these qualities. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: After the orphan reaches puberty and discernment, the guardian must hand over the estate and have the recipient's receipt witnessed to prevent later denial. BURHAN, d. 794 · author: Nikāḥ generally means marriage, but in this verse it denotes puberty. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians should regularly test orphans' religious and financial judgment during adolescence until they reach marriageable age, by puberty or age. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Test orphans when they reach puberty; if their judgment and handling of property are sound, hand over their wealth, and do not consume it wastefully or hastily before they mature. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · مجاهد: Test the orphans' minds; reaching marriage means puberty, discernment means perceiving, and sound judgment means intellect. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · سعيد بن جبير: Do not consume the property without right or hastily before the orphan reaches puberty, fearing he will reclaim it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: When an orphan reaches puberty with intelligence and dignity, his property is handed to him. ITQAN, d. 911 · ابن فارس: Nikāḥ usually means marriage, but in 4:6 it means puberty. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Reaching marriage age means puberty, when a person becomes eligible for marriage. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Once puberty and sound judgment are established, transfer the orphan’s property without delay. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa delays transfer until age twenty-five, seven years beyond the assumed age of puberty, then rel
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
