<<chunk 49, part 4 of 0..5>>
 aḥastum or aḥsastum, meaning perceived. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r4): Ibn Masʿūd’s variant reads aḥastum or aḥsastum, meaning perceived. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r1): Ibn Masʿūd’s variant reads aḥastum or aḥsastum, meaning perceived."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q11", "question": "What is the rushd required here?", "turns_on": "Whether financial competence alone suffices or religious uprightness is also required.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q11/p1", "position": "Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن عباس: Another report from Ibn ʿAbbas and al-Suddi defines it as sound judgment and care of property. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Because 4:2 ordered guardians to hand over orphan property, this verse specifies when: both puberty and discerned sound judgment must be established before delivery. | mentions 4:2 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The required judgment concerns financial competence: the ward can manage property, avoid waste, and resist being deceived. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · الشافعي: If someone first reaches sound judgment and later becomes foolish, al-Shāfiʿī would restrain him, while Abū Ḥanīfa would not; al-Rāzī supports restraint by analogy with the still-unfit minor whose property is preserved for future need. | mentions 4:5 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جماعة من الفقهاء: Some jurists test a boy by letting him manage household expenses for a month or a small sum under supervision; if he shows sound judgment, the guardian hands over the estate and witnesses it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عباس والسدي والثوري: Ibn Abbas, al-Suddi, and al-Thawri define sound judgment as competence of mind and preservation of wealth. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مجاهد: Mujahid says rushd refers specifically to intellect. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أكثر العلماء: Most scholars, including Malik, say sound judgment follows puberty; a person who remains imprudent stays under guardianship even when old. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Property is delivered only when both sound judgment and puberty are present; most jurists agree, while Abu Hanifa, Zufar, and al-Nakha'i release a person at twenty-five without requiring sound judgment. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Once a girl is prudent, contracts made during the waiting period are treated either as void until then or as valid only when sound judgment is shown; after it, they are accepted unless folly appears. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · النخعي، أبو حنيفة: Al-Nakha'i and Abu Hanifa wait until age twenty-five, then release the property whether discernment is evident or not. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عطية، مالك: Ibn Atiyya and Malik require both puberty and discernment before property is handed over. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: After the orphan reaches puberty and discernment, the guardian must hand over the estate and have the recipient's receipt witnessed to prevent later denial. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians must document the return of an orphan’s property because maturity and sound judgment vary, and witnesses prevent disputes and protect both sides. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · مجاهد: Do not hand an orphan his property, even if his hair has turned gray, until sound judgment is evident. ITQAN, d. 911 · author: Rushdan means sound judgment or competence. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Once puberty and sound judgment are established, transfer the orphan’s property without delay. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa takes sound financial management as the test’s criterion. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ابن المواز عن مالك: Testing occurs after discernment but before puberty; the likely reason is that testing earlier risks wasting assets because a child's reason is incomplete. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The perception of sound judgment is a second condition; its clause and response answer idha, with fa explicitly marking the conditional relation. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The wording makes puberty the default endpoint of guardianship only when sound judgment is found, preventing guardians from keeping wards' property for their own benefit. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Both puberty and sound judgment must occur before property is delivered; their order of occurrence does not matter, the position of the Malikis and Imam al-Haramayn, which the author endorses. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Rushd has two synonymous vocalizations and means ordered rational conduct; here it specifically means protecting and managing property well, as in the earlier testing. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya likewise calls for court confirmation of a ward's sound judgment because guardians may collude with an immature ward to secure their own release. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Property is withheld unless both maturity and sound judgment are present; the general Muslim scholarly consensus requires both. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The ruling covers female and male orphans; a girl who reaches maturity with sound judgment receives her property. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · الصادق عليه السلام: An orphan's legal minority ends at puberty, but if he has reached it without sound judgment or remains foolish or weak, the guardian retains his money. | mentions 4:6 TABATABAI, d. 1402 · الصادق عليه السلام: The Imam glosses the tested sound judgment in this verse as preserving wealth. | mentions 4:6 TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Īnās means observing with a shade of familiarity; rushd is sound direction toward life's aims and the ability to avert harm. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Marriage age is the basis for personal legal capacity in worship and similar duties, but financial dealings and admissions also require rushd to protect inexperienced orphans from fraud. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Rushd is unnecessary for worship, punishments, and blood-money rules because a person can recognize their duties and the ugliness of crimes before attaining financial maturity. BINTSHATI-IJAZ, d. 1419 · author: Testing the orphans should produce reassuring confidence that they truly have sound judgment; the phrase means more than seeing outward, material signs of maturity at puberty. STUDYQURAN · Z: Many jurists set male maturity at eighteen; absent sound judgment then, some allow withholding property for at most seven more years. STUDYQURAN · Q: Jurists disagree whether transfer requires both physical maturity and sound judgment or whether either alone is enough. Against — QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو الفرج الجوزي: Al-Jawzi answers that God dignified wealth as human sustenance, prohibited entrusting it to the foolish, and ordered its return when orphans attain sound judgment. | mentions 4:5, 4:6 Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The analogy fails: puberty is not stated as a cause of transfer but marks the usual age when judgment matures; discernment is tested then, as shown by إذا for timing and إن for the condition. Against — ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Critics argue that if any maturity inevitably appears by twenty-five, Abu Hanifa’s position collapses into the other imams’ rule; al-Alusi says financial competence need not arise by that age, while generic maturity would not satisfy the verse. Against — IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa releases a ward after seven years beyond puberty even without observed sound judgment; the author says this contradicts the conditional wording and the rationale for guardianship. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p405/r8): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p407/r2): Al-Tabari argues that consensus removes financial restraint from a rational, financially capable sinner. ZAJJAJ (ZAJJAJ:v2p13/r4): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r2): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. DAMGHANI (DAMGHANI:v1p204/r7): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p166#2/r1): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p503#2/r4): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r9): Rushd is rational financial competence and preservation of property. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r10): Al-Tabrisi prefers intellect and financial management; irreligion alone does not restrain a capable adult."}, {"id": "4:6/q11/p2", "position": "Rushd includes religious uprightness and sound management", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن عباس: Rushd is soundness in religion and care of property according to Ibn ʿAbbas and al-Hasan. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · السدي: A report from al-Suddi combines reason and religious soundness. IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · الحسن: Al-Hasan and Qatada say the trial tests both reason and religion; Mujahid is reported with either this or the reason-only view. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · الشافعي: Al-Shāfiʿī requires religious uprightness as well as financial competence, whereas Abū Ḥanīfa does not; al-Rāzī prefers al-Shāfiʿī because rushd means attaining good, contrasts with error (2:256), and is denied of sinful Adam and Pharaoh (20:121; 11:97). | mentions 2:256, 20:121, 11:97 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The disagreement over religious uprightness matters because al-Shāfiʿī places a sinful person under legal restraint, while Abū Ḥanīfa does not. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الحسن وقتادة وغيرهما: Hasan, Qatada, and others interpret rushd as soundness of intellect and religion. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Anīsū means they have discerned sound judgment in handling business and transactions. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · سعيد بن جبير: Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Ibn Abbas, al-Hasan, and other authorities explain discernment as sound religion and protection of wealth; jurists end guardianship when a boy reaches puberty with these qualities. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · الحسن: Sound judgment means religious integrity and safeguarding property. DURR-FULL, d. 911 
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
