<<chunk 50, part 5 of 0..5>>
 إسراف is excessive spending, and سرف is error in where one spends. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Israf is exceeding what is permitted, by excess or shortfall; asrafa usually names excess and sarafa deficiency, while heedlessness or error is not intended here."}, {"id": "4:6/q22/p4", "position": "Saraf can denote association of partners with God in another verse", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Some exegetes gloss saraf as shirk in 40:43."}, {"id": "4:6/q22/p5", "position": "Saraf can denote excess in sins in another verse", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA: Some exegetes gloss saraf as excessive sin in 39:53."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q23", "question": "What conduct does the ban on eating the estate forbid?", "turns_on": "Whether all unauthorized consumption is prohibited or only wasteful use.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q23/p1", "position": "The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن عباس: The prohibition addresses guardians: Ibn ʿAbbas says not to consume an orphan’s property without right, or hasten to consume it before the child grows up. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Guardians must not consume the property wastefully or hasten to spend it before the orphans grow up and reclaim it; the phrase describes their waste and haste. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · مجاهد: Mujahid says the allowance is abrogated by the prohibition on consuming wealth without trade by mutual consent, because guardianship is not a sale. | mentions 4:29 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو يوسف: Abu Yusuf says he is unsure whether the allowance was abrogated by the prohibition on consuming wealth without consensual trade. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الكيا الطبري: Al-Kiya al-Tabari agrees that the verse requires subsistence from one's own property, not the child's; he harmonizes its ambiguity with clear prohibitions on consuming another's wealth without consent, especially an orphan's. | mentions 4:29, 4:2 BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Guardians must not consume orphan wealth wastefully or hastily before the children grow; this may describe the guardian's own extravagance and haste. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Do not consume the property wastefully or rush to spend it before the orphans grow up and reclaim it; the verbal nouns are circumstantial or purposive. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The prohibition on consuming or wasting the estate is an independent sentence, not coordinated with the command to hand it over, which follows the puberty condition. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Guardians are forbidden to consume orphan property wastefully or hastily before the orphans reach adulthood, unless there is a necessary need. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians must not consume orphans' wealth wastefully or hastily before they grow up, fearing they will lose access; extravagance means spending beyond due moderation. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Test orphans when they reach puberty; if their judgment and handling of property are sound, hand over their wealth, and do not consume it wastefully or hastily before they mature. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · سعيد بن جبير: Do not consume the property without right or hastily before the orphan reaches puberty, fearing he will reclaim it. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · الحسن: Do not consume the orphan's property extravagantly or in haste. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says the permission for a poor guardian to eat is abrogated by the prohibition on consuming orphans' property unjustly. | mentions 4:10 ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: The meaning of fair dealing is clarified by prohibitions on consuming wealth wrongfully or unjustly, including the orphan’s property, and by the command to uphold justice for orphans. | mentions 2:188, 4:29, 4:10, 4:127 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The prohibition reiterates the earlier ban in 4:2 and exposes guardians who hasten to consume wards' assets before the wards mature and can demand an accounting. | mentions 4:2 TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Prohibitions on fornication and unlawful consumption of wealth, except consensual trade, establish foundations for family and economic life. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: The contrast distinguishes wrongful, excessive consumption without need or entitlement from a guardian's hurried attempt to take customary compensation before the orphan can object. Against — SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The alternative coordination would make ‘do not consume’ follow the conditional result, contradicting ‘in haste lest they grow up.’ IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p866/r5): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. THALABI (THALABI:v3p243/r1): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. MAWARDI-FULL (MAWARDI-FULL:v1p452/r19): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p332/r1): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (WAHIDI-WAJIZ:4:5-6/r3): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p167/r1): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p505/r4): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11/r2): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6#2/r1): The ban forbids wasteful or unjust consumption before delivery."}, {"id": "4:6/q23/p2", "position": "The ban covers every unauthorized use, including small takings", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: The prohibition does not imply that non-extravagant consumption is allowed; it forbids consuming the orphan's property except what is specifically permitted. Israf means excess or transgression. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: The phrase forbids consuming the estate wrongfully and wastefully; it does not permit small unlawful consumption. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The prohibition singles out eating, the basic and common use of wealth, so other forms of consuming it are prohibited all the more."}, {"id": "4:6/q23/p3", "position": "Eating names consumption as a whole", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Eating here stands for taking property because consumption is the main use of what is taken."}]}

<<end of chunk>>
