<<chunk 50, part 3 of 0..5>>
eward, and punishment, so keeping his property under another’s control resembles oppression. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Although this reasoning might warrant immediate payment at puberty even without competence, payment is delayed until twenty-five to allow education, maturity, and restraint from waste. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The delay resembles, in one respect, holding the property of rebels until they return to obedience. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Seven years was chosen because it commonly changes a child’s capacities; ten also marks change in the prayer hadith, but the lower sufficient period is adopted. Against — ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi condemns Ibn Hazm and his Shiʿi followers for vilifying Abu Hanifa over this subsidiary disagreement while often relying on weaker evidence elsewhere. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects that argument: the context makes financial stewardship the required judgment; otherwise the syntax loses coherence, and anyone still unable to protect property at twenty-five remains like a child and must not receive it. Against — QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi criticizes Abu Hanifa's grandfather rationale and Abu Bakr al-Razi's argument from two verses: unrestricted wording must, by agreement among legal theorists, be read with the qualified wording. Against — ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Critics argue that if any maturity inevitably appears by twenty-five, Abu Hanifa’s position collapses into the other imams’ rule; al-Alusi says financial competence need not arise by that age, while generic maturity would not satisfy the verse. Against — IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa releases a ward after seven years beyond puberty even without observed sound judgment; the author says this contradicts the conditional wording and the rationale for guardianship. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r4): Abu Hanifa withholds a wastrel's assets until twenty-five, then releases them; transactions may already be valid. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r5): The rationale says a person might be a grandfather by twenty-five. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p166#2/r1): At twenty-five, release the property even without observed prudence. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p503#2/r6): Abu Hanifa counts puberty at eighteen plus seven years of change. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p503#2/r7): At twenty-five, release the property even without observed prudence. Against — The author argues that a sinner or financially wasteful adult fails the stated judgment condition."}, {"id": "4:6/q17/p2", "position": "Continue withholding until actual financial competence appears", "reasons": "BAGHAWI-FULL: Scripture requires actual sound judgment; a sinner or wastrel at twenty-five lacks it."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q18", "question": "Does a woman's marriage affect release of her property?", "turns_on": "Whether sex and marriage change the proof or timing of financial maturity.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q18/p1", "position": "A woman's release or dealings wait for marriage and experience", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · المفضل: Nikah originally meant sexual intercourse; the term later expanded to include the marriage contract. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · علماؤنا: Maliki scholars require a girl to have consummated marriage after puberty before testing her judgment, reasoning that seclusion limits her experience; men encounter public dealings from childhood. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Once a girl is prudent, contracts made during the waiting period are treated either as void until then or as valid only when sound judgment is shown; after it, they are accepted unless folly appears. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: A guardian may manage an orphan's estate as a father would: trade, pay zakat and obligations, cover damages and parents' support, arrange marriage, pay a dowry, acquire a concubine, and settle claims in the ward's interest. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: A wealthy guardian must refrain from the orphan's funds, while a poor guardian may consume customary support; isti'faf means abstaining, as in the command to unmarried people. | mentions 24:33 ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Reported daughter-specific waiting rules include maturity without marriage, five years after consummation, a year, or seven years with a father versus one year for an orphan without a guardian. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · مجاهد: Test the orphans' minds; reaching marriage means puberty, discernment means perceiving, and sound judgment means intellect. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Testing the orphans signifies testing deficient wayfarers; reaching marriage means becoming ready for guidance, and sound judgment means steadiness on the path without fickleness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Women lacked agency, work, property, and inheritance; men married without limit while prostitution and public sexual display were widespread. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Guardians often seized orphan property, married orphan girls for their wealth, then abandoned them; frequent warfare created many orphans. Against — QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن العربي: Ibn al-Arabi reports Maliki waiting periods of five to seven years for a girl with a father and one year for an orphan, but says these limits lack evidence and are difficult to define; the Quranic criterion is demonstrated judgment suited to each person. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r7): A woman's release or dealings wait for marriage and experience. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p166#2/r4): A woman's release or dealings wait for marriage and experience. Against — The Prophet accepted women's jewelry donations without asking marital status."}, {"id": "4:6/q18/p2", "position": "A prudent adult woman receives her property like a man, regardless of marriage", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · الأعشى: Al-Aʿsha's line uses nikah for a captive woman who had been sexually possessed without dowry or contract. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جماعة من الفقهاء: For a girl, some jurists test household management, such as supervising cotton workers and judging the yarn; if prudent, her estate is delivered with witnesses, otherwise guardianship continues. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi prefers al-Shafi'i's view that intercourse itself adds nothing to a woman's judgment if she already understands affairs and manages her wealth. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Another account says Aws b. Thabit or Aws b. Suwayd died leaving Umm Kujja, three daughters, and two cousins, who seized the estate and excluded the women. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The general word orphans includes daughters, who therefore receive the same treatment as sons. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The ruling covers female and male orphans; a girl who reaches maturity with sound judgment receives her property. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Bedouin clans lived by raids and taking others' property or women, leaving no security or peace; possession went to whoever prevailed. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Women were excluded from inheritance, and a deceased man's widow could be treated as part of the estate; minor children were also excluded. THALABI: The Prophet accepted women's jewelry donations without asking marital status."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q19", "question": "Who establishes the ward's competence for release?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q19/p1", "position": "Court confirmation or investigation should establish competence", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · أبو بكر الرازي: Abū Bakr al-Rāzī argues that if the guardian is not believed because the orphan did not entrust him, the same should apply to a judge or father, and even to property both parties admit was lost. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الحسن بن صالح بن حي: Hasan ibn Salih distinguishes the father's appointed guardian, who may take customary support, from a judge's guardian, who may take nothing. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi says abstaining from compensation is better; he condemns fees taken by partition judges and their agents as unlawful and within the threat against consuming orphan property. | mentions 4:10 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عطية: Views differ on whether a guardian must obtain a judge's confirmation before release; Ibn Atiyya says guardians today should, given collusion and false declarations of a ward's prudence. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · طائفة: Some require the guardian to present the case to a judge and establish maturity, or to be someone the judge trusts. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الحسن بن حي: Hasan b. Hayy distinguishes a father-appointed guardian, who may eat reasonably, from a judge-appointed guardian, who must seek wages from the public treasury. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · اللخمي: A guardian appointed by a father or judge should not be accepted as having certified the ward's maturity without investigation, given possible collusion and corruption. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya likewise calls for court confirmation of a ward's sound judgment because guardians may collude with an immature ward to secure their own release. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Although this caution did not become general practice, notaries commend documenting maturity for a father's appointee; the sound view for a judge's appointee requires proof before the judge, as practiced. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The address is to the community generally, implemented by the officials responsible for wards and guardians; that official is the judge. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · الجمهور: The majority equate a judge-appointed guardian with a father's guardian; the author endorses this because the verse does not distinguish them. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects the analogies: distrust of a judge would create endless appeals; a father has greater compassion than a stranger; a non-negligent accidental loss must be accepted or guardianship would fail, unlike witnessed delivery. Against — QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الكيا الطبري: Al-Kiya answers that j
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
