<<chunk 50, part 1 of 0..5>>
er condition’s answer implicit from the preceding answer, requiring the conditions to occur in reverse nesting order; al-Jassas says Muhammad and Abu Yusuf also dispute the issue. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · القفال والقاضي الحسين والغزالي في الوجيز والإمام الرازي: These scholars held that the order of the conditions in speech determines their order in occurrence, applying it to suspended oaths, divorce, and emancipation. Against — The author says idha gives time and in states the tested condition."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q16", "question": "What conditions require release of the property?", "turns_on": "Whether the verse requires both puberty and observed financial maturity.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q16/p1", "position": "Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · author: Removal of an orphan’s legal restraint depends on both puberty and maturity; guardians must test them and deliver their property once maturity is clear. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Because 4:2 ordered guardians to hand over orphan property, this verse specifies when: both puberty and discerned sound judgment must be established before delivery. | mentions 4:2 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · الشافعي: If someone first reaches sound judgment and later becomes foolish, al-Shāfiʿī would restrain him, while Abū Ḥanīfa would not; al-Rāzī supports restraint by analogy with the still-unfit minor whose property is preserved for future need. | mentions 4:5 RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Once puberty and discerned judgment are both present, guardians must hand over the property; no separate complete-intellect condition is stated because judgment already entails more than basic reason. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · أبو حنيفة: The jurists agree that an adolescent who is not financially sound does not receive the estate; Abū Ḥanīfa releases it at twenty-five regardless of demonstrated judgment, after puberty at eighteen plus seven years for changing maturity, invoking the prayer training age of seven. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · الشافعي وأبو يوسف ومحمد: Al-Shāfiʿī, Abū Yūsuf, and Muḥammad say the estate is withheld indefinitely until sound judgment is actually observed. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Testing means assessing character, judgment, and ability to manage property; a promising child may receive a small trial amount, with the full estate delivered if managed well and retained if mismanaged. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Passing a test alone does not end guardianship: the verse also requires reaching marriageable age before the estate is released. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · قتادة: Qatada transmits the case of Habban ibn Munqidh, whose weak commercial judgment prompted a request for interdiction; the Prophet instead told him to state that there was no fraud and that he had three days to withdraw. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Property is delivered only when both sound judgment and puberty are present; most jurists agree, while Abu Hanifa, Zufar, and al-Nakha'i release a person at twenty-five without requiring sound judgment. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Deliver property promptly at puberty only if maturity is observed; the conditional grammar makes maturity a prerequisite. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Once puberty and discernible judgment are present, deliver their property without delay; the syntax makes release conditional on judgment after puberty. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: The indefinite رشد either specifies commercial judgment or signals that even a little sound judgment suffices; this supports Abū Ḥanīfa's release of property at age twenty-five. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Testing should suit each child's abilities and work; after puberty, if maturity appears, the estate is handed over and witnessed, with witnessing following delivery. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · النخعي، أبو حنيفة: Al-Nakha'i and Abu Hanifa wait until age twenty-five, then release the property whether discernment is evident or not. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: On the majority analysis, idhā is governed by the sense of its answer: when they reach marriageable age mature, hand over their property. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: After the orphan reaches puberty and discernment, the guardian must hand over the estate and have the recipient's receipt witnessed to prevent later denial. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Test orphans when they reach puberty; if their judgment and handling of property are sound, hand over their wealth, and do not consume it wastefully or hastily before they mature. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa delays transfer until age twenty-five, seven years beyond the assumed age of puberty, then releases it even without observed prudence. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi endorses the lower-complexity analysis associated with al-Zamakhshari and al-Zajjaj: hatta governs the whole temporal clause, idha remains temporal, and delivery follows puberty plus financial maturity. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعي: Al-Shafiʿi and the two Hanafi disciples follow the verse’s apparent requirement that property is withheld if puberty arrives without financial maturity. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa requires delivery seven years after puberty even without perceived maturity, because the period permits change and education; he reads the earlier general command to give orphans their property as applying after puberty. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi notes that the Hanafi argument from give the orphans their property depends on reading it as delivery after puberty, an interpretation already debated. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Although this reasoning might warrant immediate payment at puberty even without competence, payment is delayed until twenty-five to allow education, maturity, and restraint from waste. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The warning against consuming orphan property wastefully and before they grow supports Abu Hanifa’s view that property should not be withheld once they have grown, with the special delay for an immature adult explained earlier. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Both puberty and sound judgment must occur before property is delivered; their order of occurrence does not matter, the position of the Malikis and Imam al-Haramayn, which the author endorses. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ابن عطية: Ibn Atiyya likewise calls for court confirmation of a ward's sound judgment because guardians may collude with an immature ward to secure their own release. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Property is withheld unless both maturity and sound judgment are present; the general Muslim scholarly consensus requires both. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The ruling covers female and male orphans; a girl who reaches maturity with sound judgment receives her property. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · الصادق عليه السلام: An orphan's legal minority ends at puberty, but if he has reached it without sound judgment or remains foolish or weak, the guardian retains his money. | mentions 4:6 KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: Orphan property is delivered only after both marriageable age and actual financial maturity, since either can occur before the other; jurists differ on age from fifteen to nineteen and on separate ages by sex, and a state may select and legislate one view. STUDYQURAN · Z: Many jurists set male maturity at eighteen; absent sound judgment then, some allow withholding property for at most seven more years. MUQATIL (MUQATIL:4:6/r1): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p403/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p407/r2): Al-Tabari argues that consensus removes financial restraint from a rational, financially capable sinner. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p407/r3): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p864#2/r7): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p866/r4): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p870/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. THALABI (THALABI:v3p254/r4): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. THALABI (THALABI:v3p254/r5): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. THALABI (THALABI:v3p254/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r3): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. THALABI (THALABI:v3p256/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. MAWARDI-FULL (MAWARDI-FULL:v1p452/r18): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (WAHIDI-WAJIZ:4:5-6/r2): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p165/r4): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p165/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p166#2/r3): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p503#2/r1): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r7): The author says idha gives time and in states the tested condition. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6#2/r1): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r6): Release requires puberty and observed sound judgment. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r10): Al-Tabrisi prefers intellect and financial management; irreligion alone does not restrain a capable adult."}, {"id": "4:6/q16/p2", "position": "Deliver the estate promptly when entitlement is established", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · القاضي أبو يعلى: Witnesses at delivery are a precaution, not an obligation; evidence protects the orphan from falsely denying receipt and the guardian from an oath if delivery is disputed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · مالك والشافعي: Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī do not accept the guardian’s bare claim that he delivered the property or spent it on the ward; Abū Ḥanīfa and his associates do accept it. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
