<<chunk 50, part 2 of 0..5>>
· author: The preceding warning against consuming wealth hastily before the orphan grows up shows why suspicion of guardians is well-founded and strengthens the case for witnessing delivery. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Witnessing protects the orphan from injustice and short delivery because the guardian cannot convincingly claim to have transferred the assets without witnesses; al-Rāzī says both the command’s wording and its purpose require it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: The command to test orphans addresses everyone and explains how their property is to be delivered; one occasion reported is the uncle of the orphaned Thabit ibn Rifa'a asking the Prophet what he may use and when to return the child's assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جماعة من الفقهاء: For a girl, some jurists test household management, such as supervising cotton workers and judging the yarn; if prudent, her estate is delivered with witnesses, otherwise guardianship continues. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · الشافعي: Al-Shafi'i interdicts someone who corrupts both wealth and religion or wealth alone; if religion is corrupt but wealth managed, one view interdicts him and another does not. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو العباس بن شريح: Ibn Shurayh chooses the Shafi'i view that a person who misuses religion but manages wealth should still be interdicted. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو إسحاق المروزي: Al-Maruzi chooses not to interdict someone who is religiously corrupt but manages wealth; al-Qurtubi calls this the apparent Shafi'i position. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ابن عطية: Views differ on whether a guardian must obtain a judge's confirmation before release; Ibn Atiyya says guardians today should, given collusion and false declarations of a ward's prudence. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Malik and one Shafi'i view restore guardianship if a released person becomes wasteful; Abu Hanifa says it cannot return, but al-Qurtubi cites the Quran's protection of wealth and its provision for a guardian when a debtor becomes foolish or weak. | mentions 4:5, 2:282 QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Speaking kindly means gentle address and reassuring promises; interpretations include prayers for the child and promising delivery of the estate once he is prudent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The apparent wording gives the guardian independent authority to hand over the estate. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · أبو حنيفة وصاحباه: Abu Hanifa and his two companions allow a guardian who is traveling to take what he needs but not to retain anything; a resident may take nothing. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Witnessing delivery prevents disputes and suspicion, protects the guardian from liability if the ward denies receipt, reassures the ward, and marks release from restraint for ordinary dealings. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أصحابنا: The author’s Hanafi school does not make witnesses obligatory and accepts the guardian’s sworn statement of delivery. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · مالك والشافعي: Malik and al-Shafiʿi require proof and do not accept a guardian’s claim of delivery without witnesses. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعي: Al-Shafiʿi says testing need not authorize transactions or hand over property: the guardian can make the contract after observing the minor’s ability. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The fa in give them their property signals prompt delivery at the point of entitlement; some also see a semantic distinction between paying it over here and the earlier verb give. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: This warning reinforces the order to hand over the property and prepares for the rule distinguishing a wealthy guardian from a poor one. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعية والمالكية: The Shafi'i and Maliki schools regard witnessing the transfer as obligatory and infer that a guardian cannot prove delivery merely by his assertion. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The handover clause addresses guardians and trustees: after observing the preceding requirements, they deliver the assets under their care to the orphans; fronting the recipient emphasizes them. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: When handing orphans their property, the guardian should deliver it in the presence of witnesses. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Alternatively, the command connects to 4:2 and explains how and when orphan property is delivered; the explicit noun is used because the antecedent is distant. | mentions 4:2 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · الفقهاء: Jurists assign delivery to the guardian, who is responsible for establishing the ward's sound management by entrusting the property. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Witnessing delivery makes the amount clear, permits later recovery of assets found to have remained with the guardian, protects the guardian from later claims, and prevents disputes. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · مالك: Malik does not accept a guardian's unsupported claim that he delivered the property; Ibn al-Faras says otherwise the command to document would be pointless because denial exposes the guardian to liability. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: A wealthy guardian must seek and adhere to self-restraint; a poor guardian may eat from the orphan's estate only in a recognized, fair manner. KURANYOLU-TEFSIR · author: Guardians test wards through suitable means, then when convinced of their ability to manage property, deliver it to its now mature owner in the presence of witnesses. STUDYQURAN · author: Witnesses when delivering the orphan’s property are generally considered mandatory; some also require them when borrowing from the orphan’s property. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects the analogies: distrust of a judge would create endless appeals; a father has greater compassion than a stranger; a non-negligent accidental loss must be accepted or guardianship would fail, unlike witnessed delivery."}, {"id": "4:6/q16/p3", "position": "Withhold until competence is observed", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · سعيد بن جبير والشعبي: Sa'id ibn Jubayr and al-Sha'bi say even an old person should not receive an orphan's estate until prudence is observed; al-Dahhak likewise withholds it even at a hundred absent sound management. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الجمهور: The apparent rule, adopted by the majority, keeps an immature person under restraint indefinitely and withholds the estate."}, {"id": "4:6/q16/p4", "position": "Release follows an additional year's observation", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن سيرين: Ibn Sirin would wait a year after maturity testing, so the child experiences all four seasons before transfer."}, {"id": "4:6/q16/p5", "position": "Puberty or judgment can suffice unless folly is established", "reasons": "Against — IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa releases a ward after seven years beyond puberty even without observed sound judgment; the author says this contradicts the conditional wording and the rationale for guardianship."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q17", "question": "May property be released at twenty-five without demonstrated competence?", "turns_on": "Whether age itself ends restraint despite continuing financial incompetence.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q17/p1", "position": "At twenty-five, release the property even without observed prudence", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · أبو حنيفة: The jurists agree that an adolescent who is not financially sound does not receive the estate; Abū Ḥanīfa releases it at twenty-five regardless of demonstrated judgment, after puberty at eighteen plus seven years for changing maturity, invoking the prayer training age of seven. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · أبو بكر الرازي: Abū Bakr al-Rāzī argues that an indefinite noun rushd requires only some rationality, so once age twenty-five arrives the verse’s condition is met. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Property is delivered only when both sound judgment and puberty are present; most jurists agree, while Abu Hanifa, Zufar, and al-Nakha'i release a person at twenty-five without requiring sound judgment. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa gives property after seven years beyond puberty even without observed maturity, since it is a period of change when a child begins to discern and is ordered to worship. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: The indefinite رشد either specifies commercial judgment or signals that even a little sound judgment suffices; this supports Abū Ḥanīfa's release of property at age twenty-five. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · النخعي، أبو حنيفة: Al-Nakha'i and Abu Hanifa wait until age twenty-five, then release the property whether discernment is evident or not. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أبو يوسف ومحمد: Abu Yusuf and Muhammad infer that an adult who remains wasteful or incapable never receives the property. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa delays transfer until age twenty-five, seven years beyond the assumed age of puberty, then releases it even without observed prudence. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · عمر: Umar is cited as saying a man’s intellect reaches completion at twenty-five. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi reasons that time and experience eventually remove childhood traces and produce some maturity because this is the mind’s age of completion. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The philosophers’ biological argument doubles the earliest period in which a boy could father a child and that child could in turn reproduce. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi notes that the Hanafi argument from give the orphans their property depends on reading it as delivery after puberty, an interpretation already debated. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الفخر: Al-Fakhr says the test concerns protecting property, so the required maturity is competence in managing its interests; otherwise the verse’s clauses would be disconnected. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الفخر: Al-Fakhr’s clear analogy says an adult or elder without the reason needed to preserve and use property should remain barred from it just as a child is. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi defends Abu Hanifa: once an orphan reaches adulthood, he is accountable for belief, worship, choice, r
<<part 2 ends; continues in part 3>>
