<<chunk 50, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "4:6/q15", "question": "How do ḥattā, idhā, in, and their responses work?", "turns_on": "How the temporal and conditional clauses nest and what each fāʾ answers.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q15/p1", "position": "Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional", "reasons": "BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Deliver property promptly at puberty only if maturity is observed; the conditional grammar makes maturity a prerequisite. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Once puberty and discernible judgment are present, deliver their property without delay; the syntax makes release conditional on judgment after puberty. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · سيبويه: Sibawayh allows إذا to function as a conditional particle in poetry under necessity because it needs a response and is followed by a verb. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الخليل: Al-Khalil argues إذا is not itself conditional because what follows is expected to happen: one says one will come when dates redden, not if they redden. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The prohibition begins an independent sentence; coordinating it with the conditional answer is rejected because it would make the warning precede the event it depends on. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: On the majority analysis, idhā is governed by the sense of its answer: when they reach marriageable age mature, hand over their property. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Some deny that idhā is conditional because its event is expected to occur; Sibawayh allows it to govern a condition in poetry, while al-Khalil argues from ‘when the dates ripen’ versus ‘if they ripen.’ SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · الشيخ: The Shaykh explains that grammarians agree idhā usually carries conditional meaning; denials mean only that it does not govern jussive verbs. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The fāʾ in ‘if you perceive’ answers idhā, and the fāʾ in ‘then hand over’ answers in. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The contrast between idha for puberty and in for maturity reflects certainty of the former and uncertainty of the latter. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The two coordinated accusatives are parsed as circumstantial accusatives, though some parse them as purpose clauses; this warning connects with the preceding prohibition, not the post-puberty conditional. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The perception of sound judgment is a second condition; its clause and response answer idha, with fa explicitly marking the conditional relation. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · إمام الحرمين: Imam al-Haramayn rejects any significance to ordering the conditions; the author agrees, noting possible effects in conditional oaths and emancipation or divorce, not in reports or rulings here. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Abu Hayyan rejects the claim that إذا lacks conditional sense: grammarians broadly treat it as a future adverb usually carrying conditional meaning, even though it does not govern jussive mood. Against — SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The alternative coordination would make ‘do not consume’ follow the conditional result, contradicting ‘in haste lest they grow up.’ Against — IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa releases a ward after seven years beyond puberty even without observed sound judgment; the author says this contradicts the conditional wording and the rationale for guardianship. FARRA (FARRA:v1p256/r7): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. NAHHAS (NAHHAS:v1p437/r4): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p336/r6): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p505/r1): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r6): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r7): The author says idha gives time and in states the tested condition. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p10#2/r8): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r3): Idhā sets the time of puberty; in makes observed judgment conditional."}, {"id": "4:6/q15/p2", "position": "The two fāʾ clauses answer idhā and in respectively", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Once puberty and discerned judgment are both present, guardians must hand over the property; no separate complete-intellect condition is stated because judgment already entails more than basic reason. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · أبو بكر الرازي: Abū Bakr al-Rāzī argues that an indefinite noun rushd requires only some rationality, so once age twenty-five arrives the verse’s condition is met. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Test orphans before puberty by observing religious soundness and money management, letting them handle preliminary contract steps; Abu Hanifa instead tests by giving them something to manage. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The maturity that must be observed is the maturity made a condition in the verse. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Some grammarians say the clause after حتى is genitive; most say حتى governs nothing, as in poetic examples beginning وحتى. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The prohibition on consuming or wasting the estate is an independent sentence, not coordinated with the command to hand it over, which follows the puberty condition. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa considers either condition sufficient unless folly is known, comparing this to the rule for concubinage. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · شيخ الإسلام: Shaykh al-Islam says the command begins specifying when and on what condition orphan wealth is returned, following the general order to give it and the ban on entrusting it to fools. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Other jurists make the final condition and its answer govern the preceding ones; some require all conditions in any order, while conjunctions alter which conditions the answer covers. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The fa in give them their property signals prompt delivery at the point of entitlement; some also see a semantic distinction between paying it over here and the earlier verb give. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · ابن مالك: Ibn Malik treats a later condition as modifying the first like a circumstantial clause; a competing analysis makes the first condition’s answer serve as the answer to subsequent ones. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ثعلب: As transmitted by al-Zajjaji, Tha'lab held that the second condition in wording is first in occurrence; Ibn Malik and al-Baghawi among the Shafi'is also chose this view. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: The condition of polytheist societies was worse than that of scriptural communities, and the Qur'an exposes their failures in human happiness. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Reforming entrenched ancestral customs is difficult; the law's prelude reflects the social conditions of Arabia and Qur'anic gradual revelation. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects that argument: the context makes financial stewardship the required judgment; otherwise the syntax loses coherence, and anyone still unable to protect property at twenty-five remains like a child and must not receive it. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Reading the prohibition as coordinated with فادفعوا would create a hardship by conditioning it on puberty; neither the wording nor its opposite makes eating otherwise lawful. Against — ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The analogy fails: puberty is not stated as a cause of transfer but marks the usual age when judgment matures; discernment is tested then, as shown by إذا for timing and إن for the condition. Against — ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi denies that the restriction turns on every kind of foolishness or remains in force indefinitely; the relevant condition is childish incapacity and the legal school does not infer absence of consequence automatically from absence of a condition."}, {"id": "4:6/q15/p3", "position": "Ḥattā marks the endpoint of testing and introduces the temporal clause", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن قتيبة: Ibn Qutayba and al-Khattabi say hasīb means sufficient or enough, deriving it from “this sufficed me.” IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن قتيبة: Ibn Qutayba and al-Khattabi also explain hasīb as reckoner/accountant, on the pattern of words for table-companion and drinker. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: حتى marks the end of testing, introduces إذا, and the response to إذا is فإن آنستم, followed by the response to إن, فادفعوا; maturity is observed after puberty. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Most grammarians make ḥattā a conjunction marking the endpoint of testing: test orphans until puberty, then give them their wealth if they show maturity. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · الزجاج وابن درستويه: Al-Zajjaj, Ibn Darastawayh, and others instead make ḥattā a preposition, leaving idhā purely temporal rather than conditional. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Al-Alusi endorses the lower-complexity analysis associated with al-Zamakhshari and al-Zajjaj: hatta governs the whole temporal clause, idha remains temporal, and delivery follows puberty plus financial maturity. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Hatta can introduce a full clause without losing its endpoint sense; here the conditional clause sets the end of testing and its fulfillment governs delivery. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Ibtala means testing; hatta introduces the endpoint, while its initial or prepositional use depends on what follows, and most grammarians treat hatta before idha as initial. | mentions 3:152 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The verse's hatta indicates that testing and perceiving judgment precede puberty, the established school position; another view forbids giving any property for testing before puberty."}, {"id": "4:6/q15/p4", "position": "The order of multiple conditions may govern their occurrence", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعي: The preferred grammatical analysis makes each lat
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
