<<chunk 51, part 1 of 0..5>>
usatives or an-clause express purpose or feared growth", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Alternatively, an implied ‘fearing’ makes the clause a purpose, with the object of badār omitted. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The two coordinated accusatives are parsed as circumstantial accusatives, though some parse them as purpose clauses; this warning connects with the preceding prohibition, not the post-puberty conditional. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: The phrase “lest they grow up” omits a negative or equivalent before an; grammarians recognize this construction, as in Qur'an 4:176. | mentions 4:176"}, {"id": "4:6/q25/p4", "position": "The two words are cognate or absolute accusatives", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Badāran is the verbal noun of bādara; it may describe mutual haste by guardian and orphan, or a one-sided action with form III meaning form I. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The phrase an yakbaru completes the verbal noun of racing; kabura with fatḥa means grow older, while kabura with ḍamma means become great, and kabura alayhi means become difficult."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q26", "question": "Does the ban on eating depend on the handover condition?", "turns_on": "Whether the prohibition is independent of the puberty condition.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q26/p1", "position": "The ban is an independent sentence", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The prohibition on consuming or wasting the estate is an independent sentence, not coordinated with the command to hand it over, which follows the puberty condition. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: The prohibition begins an independent sentence; coordinating it with the conditional answer is rejected because it would make the warning precede the event it depends on."}, {"id": "4:6/q26/p2", "position": "The ban is coordinated with the conditional handover", "reasons": "ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The two coordinated accusatives are parsed as circumstantial accusatives, though some parse them as purpose clauses; this warning connects with the preceding prohibition, not the post-puberty conditional."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q27", "question": "To whom do rich and poor refer?", "turns_on": "Whether rich and poor describe guardian or ward.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q27/p1", "position": "Rich and poor describe the orphans", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · ربيعة ويحيى بن سعيد: Rabi'a and Yahya ibn Sa'id instead take the verse to mean that the orphan receives support according to whether his own assets are ample or limited; al-Qurtubi says the majority view is correct because the child cannot manage his money. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The disagreements concern whether the division describes guardian or child; whether it concerns the guardian's or child's property; abrogation; the type of taking, eligible guardians, permissible items, wages, and repayment. Against — IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · ربيعة بن أبي عبد الرحمن: Rabi'a reads rich and poor as the orphans, assigning each enough or customary support; the author finds this far-fetched because ista'fafa means to restrain oneself from asking. Against — TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: The interpretation that a poor guardian may eat only from his own wealth fails to fit the verse's explicit distinction between rich and poor. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p867/r4): Rich and poor describe the orphans. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p870/r2): Rich and poor describe the orphans. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11/r14): Rich and poor describe the orphans."}, {"id": "4:6/q27/p2", "position": "Rich and poor describe the guardians", "reasons": "ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عباس، النخعي: They say this is about the guardian's own wealth: the wealthy should be self-sufficient and the poor should manage their own assets rather than need the orphan's property; al-Kiya al-Tabari chooses this view among Shafi'is. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ربيعة، يحيى بن سعيد: They say the verse divides the orphans' circumstances rather than guardians': spend frugally from a wealthy ward's estate and according to a poor ward's means, with guardians addressed indirectly. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · يحيى بن سعيد الأنصاري: Yahya ibn Sa'id and Rabi'a say the verse allows spending on the poor orphan according to his poverty, with nothing for the guardian; Ibn Kathir rejects this as distant from context, where rich and poor refer to guardians. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · يحيى بن سعيد وربيعة: Yahya ibn Saʿid and Rabiʿa say a poor orphan's needs should be met according to his poverty, while the guardian may take nothing for himself."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q28", "question": "What must a wealthy guardian do?", "turns_on": "Whether abstention is mandatory even for wages.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q28/p1", "position": "A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · author: A wealthy guardian should refrain from using the orphan’s assets and live on his own wealth. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: A wealthy guardian must refrain from the orphan's funds, while a poor guardian may consume customary support; isti'faf means abstaining, as in the command to unmarried people. | mentions 24:33 BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: A wealthy guardian abstains; a poor guardian may take a customary amount proportionate to need and work, since the language implies a limited right in the child's property. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: A rich guardian must refrain from the orphan's property; a poor guardian may take a carefully measured customary amount. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The apparent division addresses the guardian: a rich guardian should refrain, while a poor guardian may take only modest food carefully assessed. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · الشعبي: Al-Sha'bi says a wealthy guardian must abstain from orphan property as from carrion and blood. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · عمر بن الخطاب: Umar says he treated himself like an orphan's guardian: he abstained when wealthy, borrowed from the public treasury when in need, and repaid after becoming solvent; Ibn Kathir calls al-Bara's chain authentic. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · عمر بن الخطاب: A second report from Umar tells al-Bara that a needy guardian may take from the public funds but must restore it when able, and abstain if self-sufficient. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · عائشة: The verse concerns an orphan's guardian: a wealthy guardian abstains, while a poor guardian may take a customary amount proportionate to his care. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: A wealthy guardian should rely on his own means and take nothing; a poor guardian may take subsistence from the orphan's property to meet his needs. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: A wealthy guardian should support himself from his own property and avoid the orphan's assets. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: A wealthy guardian may take nothing; a poor one may borrow from the orphan and repay when able. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · عمر بن الخطاب: Umar treated himself as a guardian over public funds: when self-sufficient he abstained, and when needy he took a customary amount and repaid when able. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Istiafaf is more emphatic than abstinence: the wealthy guardian should actively seek greater chastity. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: A wealthy guardian must abstain from the estate, content with personal provision to protect the orphan and its assets. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: This warning reinforces the order to hand over the property and prepares for the rule distinguishing a wealthy guardian from a poor one. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: A wealthy guardian or trustee must refrain from using the orphan’s property and live on the wealth God gave him. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · عمر بن الخطاب: Umar treated the public treasury like an orphan's property: he abstained when wealthy, took a reasonable amount when needy, and repaid it when able. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: A spiritually rich guardian should abstain from a disciple's resources; one unable to bear need may benefit only to necessity's measure. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: A poor guardian or trustee may take a fair amount for the work and service performed and necessary needs; a wealthy one should abstain. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · النخعي وابن عباس: They say a wealthy guardian should live on his own means without excess from the ward's estate, while a poor guardian should limit personal spending rather than reach for it; al-Nahhas and al-Kiya approve. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: A wealthy guardian must seek and adhere to self-restraint; a poor guardian may eat from the orphan's estate only in a recognized, fair manner. Against — ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · يحيى بن سعيد: The view that the verse authorizes spending the orphan's own wealth on the orphan according to his circumstances is rejected: it does not explain the command to abstain, and disrupts the syntax. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB:v1p120#2/r5): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p411/r1): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p411/r2): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p411/r3): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p423/r3): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p427/r1): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p867/r3): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p867/r5): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p867/r6): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p867/r7): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p868/r1): A wealthy guardian must abstain entirely and live on his own means. NAHHAS (NAHHAS:
<<part 1 ends; continues in part 2>>
