<<chunk 51, part 0 of 0..5>>
{"id": "4:6/q24", "question": "What does bidāran an yakbarū mean?", "turns_on": "Whether haste is one-sided or a race with the ward's approaching adulthood.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q24/p1", "position": "The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن عباس: The prohibition addresses guardians: Ibn ʿAbbas says not to consume an orphan’s property without right, or hasten to consume it before the child grows up. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Guardians must not consume the property wastefully or hasten to spend it before the orphans grow up and reclaim it; the phrase describes their waste and haste. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The preceding warning against consuming wealth hastily before the orphan grows up shows why suspicion of guardians is well-founded and strengthens the case for witnessing delivery. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Badaran means rushing to consume before an orphan reaches maturity; grammatically it is coordinated with israfan, and an yakbaru is governed by badaran. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Guardians must not consume orphan wealth wastefully or hastily before the children grow; this may describe the guardian's own extravagance and haste. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Do not consume the property wastefully or rush to spend it before the orphans grow up and reclaim it; the verbal nouns are circumstantial or purposive. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · ابن عباس وغيره: They say rushing means the guardian hastens to exploit the ward's estate before the ward matures, claiming to act before the child can take it back. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · ابن عباس: Ibn Abbas says guardians hurried to consume orphans’ wealth before the child grew up and took the property back. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: Guardians are forbidden to consume orphan property wastefully or hastily before the orphans reach adulthood, unless there is a necessary need. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians must not consume orphans' wealth wastefully or hastily before they grow up, fearing they will lose access; extravagance means spending beyond due moderation. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: Test orphans when they reach puberty; if their judgment and handling of property are sound, hand over their wealth, and do not consume it wastefully or hastily before they mature. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · سعيد بن جبير: Do not consume the property without right or hastily before the orphan reaches puberty, fearing he will reclaim it. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Guardians who hurry to spend fear that the orphans will mature, reclaim the estate, and restrict their spending. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Mubadara means haste: the guardian may rush to consume the property before the orphan grows, while the orphan may hasten to reclaim it; the word is linked to fullness. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: The warning against consuming orphan property wastefully and before they grow supports Abu Hanifa’s view that property should not be withheld once they have grown, with the special delay for an immature adult explained earlier. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The prohibition reiterates the earlier ban in 4:2 and exposes guardians who hasten to consume wards' assets before the wards mature and can demand an accounting. | mentions 4:2 TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Isrāf is excess beyond moderation and bidār is hastening; the phrase means acting hastily for fear the orphans will grow up and stop the guardian. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Rushd is unnecessary for worship, punishments, and blood-money rules because a person can recognize their duties and the ugliness of crimes before attaining financial maturity. MUQATIL (MUQATIL:4:6/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. FARRA (FARRA:v1p256/r7): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. MAJAZ (MAJAZ:v1p116/r8): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. ABDURRAZZAQ (ABDURRAZZAQ:v1p146#2/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. AKHFASH (AKHFASH:v1p245/r6): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB (IBNQUTAYBA-GHARIB:v1p120#2/r4): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p409/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p409/r2): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p409/r3): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p409/r4): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p409/r5): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. ZAJJAJ (ZAJJAJ:v2p13/r5): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p866/r8): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. THALABI (THALABI:v3p243/r4): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. THALABI (THALABI:v3p258/r3): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. MAWARDI-FULL (MAWARDI-FULL:v1p452/r19): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. MAWARDI-FULL (MAWARDI-FULL:v1p452/r20): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p332/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p332/r2): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (WAHIDI-WAJIZ:4:5-6/r3): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. JISHUMI (JISHUMI:v2p1458#2/r3): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p167/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p505/r4): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11/r4): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6#2/r1): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r2): The guardian hastens to consume before the orphan grows and claims the estate."}, {"id": "4:6/q24/p2", "position": "Bidāran means haste", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: ‘Wastefully and hastily’ may be two objects of purpose, describing why guardians consume the property. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: ‘That they grow up’ may be the object of badār, as a verbal noun governs its object; the cited ‘feeding an orphan’ verse is parallel, though this government is disputed. | mentions 90:14-15 ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: With fatha, kabura concerns age; with damma it denotes capacity or eminence, and with ala it describes something burdensome. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: The phrase an yakbaru completes the verbal noun of racing; kabura with fatḥa means grow older, while kabura with ḍamma means become great, and kabura alayhi means become difficult."}, {"id": "4:6/q24/p3", "position": "Bidāran evokes a race between guardian consumption and the orphan's growth", "reasons": "SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Badāran is the verbal noun of bādara; it may describe mutual haste by guardian and orphan, or a one-sided action with form III meaning form I. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Bidaran evokes a race between guardian and ward: the ward approaches maturity to claim the estate as the guardian rushes to consume it, leaving the ward to prove any remaining claim."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q25", "question": "How are isrāfan, bidāran, and an yakbarū parsed?", "turns_on": "Whether the accusatives express manner, cause, or objects governed by a verbal noun.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q25/p1", "position": "Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns", "reasons": "NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: Do not consume the property wastefully or rush to spend it before the orphans grow up and reclaim it; the verbal nouns are circumstantial or purposive. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: Alternatively, both accusatives are circumstantial: the guardian acts wastefully and in haste. NAHHAS (NAHHAS:v1p437/r2): Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p332/r3): Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns. JISHUMI (JISHUMI:v2p1458#2/r4): Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p167/r1): Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6/r3): Isrāfan and bidāran are circumstantial verbal nouns."}, {"id": "4:6/q25/p2", "position": "Bidāran governs an yakbarū as its object", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Badaran means rushing to consume before an orphan reaches maturity; grammatically it is coordinated with israfan, and an yakbaru is governed by badaran. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: إسرافا and بدارا may be circumstantial verbal nouns or reasons; بدار can suggest a race between the child growing and guardian taking property, or the guardian alone, and أن يكبروا may be the object of the verbal noun or express fear. SAMIN-DURR, d. 756 · author: ‘That they grow up’ may be the object of badār, as a verbal noun governs its object; the cited ‘feeding an orphan’ verse is parallel, though this government is disputed. | mentions 90:14-15 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Israf means excessive spending on pleasures; its accusative may be circumstantial or stand for an absolute object, and the point is to censure the manner of consumption, not limit the ban to lavish eating."}, {"id": "4:6/q25/p3", "position": "The acc
<<part 0 ends; continues in part 1>>
