<<chunk 52, part 4 of 0..5>>
YOLU-TEFSIR · author: Guardians test wards through suitable means, then when convinced of their ability to manage property, deliver it to its now mature owner in the presence of witnesses. STUDYQURAN · author: Witnesses when delivering the orphan’s property are generally considered mandatory; some also require them when borrowing from the orphan’s property. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects the analogies: distrust of a judge would create endless appeals; a father has greater compassion than a stranger; a non-negligent accidental loss must be accepted or guardianship would fail, unlike witnessed delivery."}, {"id": "4:6/q37/p3", "position": "Witnessing documents a guardian's repayment of a loan", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو العالية: Abu al-Aliya explicitly interprets customary consumption as a loan, citing the command to witness the return of the assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عمر بن الخطاب وابن جبير: Umar and Ibn Jubayr understand the witnesses to document repayment by a poor guardian of a loan from the orphan's assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عبيدة: Ubayda says the verse proves that a guardian who borrowed or consumed the orphan's assets must witness repayment once solvent. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi says the wording covers both repayment and any spending for a ward; witnessing is the apparent command, and a witnessed entrustment is discharged only by witnessed return. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Other interpretations say the verse requires witnessing repayment of anything taken from the orphan, or documenting expenditures on the ward so a later dispute can be resolved; a trust received with witnesses is discharged only by witnessed return."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q38", "question": "Is calling witnesses obligatory?", "turns_on": "Whether the imperative imposes a legal duty or prudent guidance.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q38/p1", "position": "Witnessing is obligatory", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · الشافعي: Al-Shāfiʿī treats the command to call witnesses as obligatory and argues that the guardian is entrusted by religious law, not personally by the orphan. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Witnessing the handover is commanded to secure the assets and clear suspicion; scholars differ whether it is recommended, since a guardian is trusted, or obligatory, since he cannot testify in his own favor against heirs. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عبيدة: Ubayda says the verse proves that a guardian who borrowed or consumed the orphan's assets must witness repayment once solvent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: The apparent wording makes witnessing obligatory, though some say it is recommended. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: After the orphan reaches puberty and discernment, the guardian must hand over the estate and have the recipient's receipt witnessed to prevent later denial. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians must document the return of an orphan’s property because maturity and sound judgment vary, and witnesses prevent disputes and protect both sides. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أصحابنا: The author’s Hanafi school does not make witnesses obligatory and accepts the guardian’s sworn statement of delivery. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعية والمالكية: The Shafi'i and Maliki schools regard witnessing the transfer as obligatory and infer that a guardian cannot prove delivery merely by his assertion. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Witnessing may be recommended to protect the guardian's own right, or obligatory to prevent disputes and serve public order, like documenting debts in 2:282. | mentions 2:282 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · الشافعي: Al-Fakhr transmits al-Shafi'i as agreeing with Malik; al-Fakhr argues for this from the apparent obligation of witnessing, an argument the author calls weak because liability and moral duty belong to distinct legal categories. STUDYQURAN · author: Witnesses when delivering the orphan’s property are generally considered mandatory; some also require them when borrowing from the orphan’s property. Against — RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Al-Rāzī rejects the analogies: distrust of a judge would create endless appeals; a father has greater compassion than a stranger; a non-negligent accidental loss must be accepted or guardianship would fail, unlike witnessed delivery."}, {"id": "4:6/q38/p2", "position": "Witnessing is commanded, with its legal force disputed", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The community agrees that witnesses should preferably attest when a guardian hands over an adult orphan’s property: this deters a false claim by the recipient, lets the guardian defend against such a claim, and demonstrates the guardian’s integrity. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Witnessing protects the orphan from injustice and short delivery because the guardian cannot convincingly claim to have transferred the assets without witnesses; al-Rāzī says both the command’s wording and its purpose require it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو العالية: Abu al-Aliya explicitly interprets customary consumption as a loan, citing the command to witness the return of the assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi says the wording covers both repayment and any spending for a ward; witnessing is the apparent command, and a witnessed entrustment is discharged only by witnessed return. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Testing should suit each child's abilities and work; after puberty, if maturity appears, the estate is handed over and witnessed, with witnessing following delivery. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: When handing an orphan his property, the guardian should transfer it in front of witnesses as God commanded. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · سعيد بن جبير: Trustees should witness the handover of property to orphans after puberty; God is the best witness over the parties. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Witnesses should attest that the heirs received the estate, protecting the guardian from suspicion and dispute and clearing responsibility. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: When handing orphans their property, the guardian should deliver it in the presence of witnesses. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · مالك: Malik does not accept a guardian's unsupported claim that he delivered the property; Ibn al-Faras says otherwise the command to document would be pointless because denial exposes the guardian to liability. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Witnesses should document delivery to prevent later disputes; divine accounting remains the ultimate safeguard because witnesses may fail and all rulings answer to God's reckoning."}, {"id": "4:6/q38/p3", "position": "Witnessing is recommended prudence", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · القاضي أبو يعلى: Witnesses at delivery are a precaution, not an obligation; evidence protects the orphan from falsely denying receipt and the guardian from an oath if delivery is disputed. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Witnessing the handover establishes receipt and discharges the guardian, reducing suspicion and disputes and better preserving trust; the author's school treats it as recommended. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · أبو حنيفة: Abu Hanifa considers the guardian credible on oath because he is an entrusted agent; a further view explains this by treating witnessing as recommended. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11#2/r3): Witnessing is recommended prudence."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q39", "question": "What handovers or payments must be witnessed?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q39/p1", "position": "Witness the guardian's repayment of borrowed assets", "reasons": "QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · أبو العالية: Abu al-Aliya explicitly interprets customary consumption as a loan, citing the command to witness the return of the assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عمر بن الخطاب وابن جبير: Umar and Ibn Jubayr understand the witnesses to document repayment by a poor guardian of a loan from the orphan's assets. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · عبيدة: Ubayda says the verse proves that a guardian who borrowed or consumed the orphan's assets must witness repayment once solvent. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Al-Qurtubi says the wording covers both repayment and any spending for a ward; witnessing is the apparent command, and a witnessed entrustment is discharged only by witnessed return. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · عمرو بن جبير: Amr b. Jubayr limits witnessing to repayment by a guardian of money borrowed from an orphan while poor and repaid after becoming solvent. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Other interpretations say the verse requires witnessing repayment of anything taken from the orphan, or documenting expenditures on the ward so a later dispute can be resolved; a trust received with witnesses is discharged only by witnessed return."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q40", "question": "Whose word prevails if delivery is disputed?", "turns_on": "Whether a trustee's oath suffices without external evidence.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q40/p1", "position": "The guardian must prove delivery; an unsupported claim fails", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · مالك والشافعي: Mālik and al-Shāfiʿī do not accept the guardian’s bare claim that he delivered the property or spent it on the ward; Abū Ḥanīfa and his associates do accept it. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Witness the transfer to prove receipt and prevent suspicion, dispute, and liability; the chosen position and Malik require proof from the guardian, unlike Abu Hanifa. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الشافعي: Al-Shafi'i requires the guardian to produce evidence if he did not witness the transfer. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · مالك والشافعي: Malik and al-Shafiʿi require proof and do not accept a guardian’s claim of delivery without witnesses. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · مالك: Malik does not accept a guardian's unsupported claim that he delivered the property; Ibn al-Faras says otherwise the command to document would be pointless because denial exposes the guardian to liability. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p506/r7): Hanafi oath is accepted; Malik and Shafiʿi demand proof."}, {"id": "4:6/q40/p2", "position": "The guar
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
