<<chunk 52, part 3 of 0..5>>
 without trade by mutual consent, because guardianship is not a sale. | mentions 4:29 Against — IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · ابن عباس: A minority says the permission was abrogated by 4:29, but the author says this report from Ibn ʿAbbas is unsound. | mentions 4:29"}]}
{"id": "4:6/q36", "question": "What does maʿrūf mean here?", "turns_on": "Whether recognized custom denotes a loan, a legal norm, or ordinary fairness.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q36/p1", "position": "Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · أهل التفسير: Maʿruf means a loan or customary allowance in 4:6 and 4:114. | mentions 4:114 MAJAZ (MAJAZ:v1p117/r1): Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance. MAJAZ (MAJAZ:v1p117/r2): Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p423/r5): Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance. THALABI (THALABI:v3p259/r6): Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance. DAMGHANI (DAMGHANI:v1p322/r3): Here maʿrūf can mean a loan or customary allowance."}, {"id": "4:6/q36/p2", "position": "Maʿrūf is fair, accepted custom", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · author: ʿUrf can also mean a pleasant scent that identifies the thing from which it comes."}, {"id": "4:6/q36/p3", "position": "Maʿrūf is what law recognizes as obligatory or recommended", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-NUZHA, d. 597 · author: Maʿruf derives from knowledge and, in law, denotes what the revealed law makes obligatory or recommended; its opposite is munkar."}]}
{"id": "4:6/q37", "question": "Why call witnesses when property is delivered?", "turns_on": "Whether witnessing chiefly protects the guardian, records repayment, or confirms receipt.", "positions": [{"id": "4:6/q37/p1", "position": "Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion", "reasons": "IBNJAWZI-ZAD, d. 597 · القاضي أبو يعلى: Witnesses at delivery are a precaution, not an obligation; evidence protects the orphan from falsely denying receipt and the guardian from an oath if delivery is disputed. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The preceding warning against consuming wealth hastily before the orphan grows up shows why suspicion of guardians is well-founded and strengthens the case for witnessing delivery. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: Witnessing protects the orphan from injustice and short delivery because the guardian cannot convincingly claim to have transferred the assets without witnesses; al-Rāzī says both the command’s wording and its purpose require it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · author: Witnessing the handover is commanded to secure the assets and clear suspicion; scholars differ whether it is recommended, since a guardian is trusted, or obligatory, since he cannot testify in his own favor against heirs. BAYDAWI-FULL, d. 685 · author: Witness the transfer to prove receipt and prevent suspicion, dispute, and liability; the chosen position and Malik require proof from the guardian, unlike Abu Hanifa. NASAFI-FULL, d. 710 · author: When returning the property, obtain witnesses to prove receipt and avoid denial or a disputed oath. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Witnessing delivery prevents disputes and suspicion, protects the guardian from liability if the ward denies receipt, reassures the ward, and marks release from restraint for ordinary dealings. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: After the orphan reaches puberty and discernment, the guardian must hand over the estate and have the recipient's receipt witnessed to prevent later denial. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Guardians must document the return of an orphan’s property because maturity and sound judgment vary, and witnesses prevent disputes and protect both sides. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · author: Witnesses should attest that the heirs received the estate, protecting the guardian from suspicion and dispute and clearing responsibility. BURSEVI, d. 1127 · مالك والشافعي: Malik and al-Shafiʿi require proof and do not accept a guardian’s claim of delivery without witnesses. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: Witnessing the handover establishes receipt and discharges the guardian, reducing suspicion and disputes and better preserving trust; the author's school treats it as recommended. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Witnessing delivery makes the amount clear, permits later recovery of assets found to have remained with the guardian, protects the guardian from later claims, and prevents disputes. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · author: Witnessing may be recommended to protect the guardian's own right, or obligatory to prevent disputes and serve public order, like documenting debts in 2:282. | mentions 2:282 IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · مالك: Malik does not accept a guardian's unsupported claim that he delivered the property; Ibn al-Faras says otherwise the command to document would be pointless because denial exposes the guardian to liability. IBNASHUR-FULL, d. 1393 · الشافعي: Al-Fakhr transmits al-Shafi'i as agreeing with Malik; al-Fakhr argues for this from the apparent obligation of witnessing, an argument the author calls weak because liability and moral duty belong to distinct legal categories. TABATABAI, d. 1402 · author: Witnesses should document delivery to prevent later disputes; divine accounting remains the ultimate safeguard because witnesses may fail and all rulings answer to God's reckoning. MUQATIL (MUQATIL:4:6/r2): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. ABDURRAZZAQ (ABDURRAZZAQ:v1p146#2/r5): Mujahid, Saʿid, and al-Hakam cite witnessed handover as evidence that the allowance is a loan. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p413/r1): ʿUbayda infers repayment from the command to witness return. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p417/r1): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p429/r1): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. TAB-FULL (TAB-FULL:v6p429/r2): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. ZAJJAJ (ZAJJAJ:v2p13/r7): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. IBNABIHATIM (IBNABIHATIM:v3p870/r5): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. NAHHAS (NAHHAS:v1p437/r3): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. THALABI (THALABI:v3p259/r8): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. MAWARDI-FULL (MAWARDI-FULL:v1p452/r29): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. WAHIDI-BASIT (WAHIDI-BASIT:v6p336/r1): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. WAHIDI-WAJIZ (WAHIDI-WAJIZ:4:5-6/r4): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. BAGHAWI-FULL (BAGHAWI-FULL:v2p168/r4): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. KASHSHAF-FULL (KASHSHAF-FULL:v1p506/r6): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11#2/r1): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. IBNATIYYA-FULL (IBNATIYYA-FULL:v2p11/r15): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion. TABRISI (TABRISI:4:6#2/r8): Witnesses establish receipt and prevent disputes or suspicion."}, {"id": "4:6/q37/p2", "position": "Witnessing records the handover", "reasons": "RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · author: The community agrees that witnesses should preferably attest when a guardian hands over an adult orphan’s property: this deters a false claim by the recipient, lets the guardian defend against such a claim, and demonstrates the guardian’s integrity. RAZI-FULL, d. 606 · النبي: The Prophet instructed a person who found lost property to bring upright witnesses and neither hide nor lose it, so that the finder’s trustworthiness is evident. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جماعة من الفقهاء: Some jurists test a boy by letting him manage household expenses for a month or a small sum under supervision; if he shows sound judgment, the guardian hands over the estate and witnesses it. QURTUBI-FULL, d. 671 · جماعة من الفقهاء: For a girl, some jurists test household management, such as supervising cotton workers and judging the yarn; if prudent, her estate is delivered with witnesses, otherwise guardianship continues. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · author: Testing should suit each child's abilities and work; after puberty, if maturity appears, the estate is handed over and witnessed, with witnessing following delivery. ABUHAYYAN-FULL, d. 745 · الشافعي: Al-Shafi'i requires the guardian to produce evidence if he did not witness the transfer. IBNKATHIR-FULL, d. 774 · author: God is sufficient as accountant, witness, and watcher over guardians, knowing whether they preserve the full estate or diminish it through concealed accounting and deception. BIQAI-FULL, d. 885 · author: Requiring witnesses deters a guardian from betrayal, since he knows a later claim will require evidence. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · ابن عباس: When handing an orphan his property, the guardian should transfer it in front of witnesses as God commanded. DURR-FULL, d. 911 · سعيد بن جبير: Trustees should witness the handover of property to orphans after puberty; God is the best witness over the parties. ITQAN, d. 911 · author: When a qualified ruling has no other basis, it constrains an unqualified one; witness fairness is therefore required in sales and handing orphans their property as well as in divorce and wills. | mentions 65:2, 5:106 BURSEVI, d. 1127 · أصحابنا: The author’s Hanafi school does not make witnesses obligatory and accepts the guardian’s sworn statement of delivery. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · الشافعية والمالكية: The Shafi'i and Maliki schools regard witnessing the transfer as obligatory and infer that a guardian cannot prove delivery merely by his assertion. ALUSI-FULL, d. 1270 · author: A spiritual handover calls for witnessing God and the spirits of the divine presence and taking a covenant that the disciple honor rights owed to God and creation. ELMALILI, d. 1361 · author: When handing orphans their property, the guardian should deliver it in the presence of witnesses. KURAN
<<part 3 ends; continues in part 4>>
