<<chunk 73, part 4 of 0..5>>
bas variously names the Sacred Mosque and al-Aqsa or Noah's mosque and Jerusalem; Qatadah names Damascus and Jerusalem. Muhammad ibn Kab names the Companions of the Cave's mosque and Elijah's. Ka'b and Abu Habib list sacred mountains. Jabir transmits a Prophetic identification of Mecca. A weak Ibn Abbas report allegorizes Muhammad, idolaters, and four caliphs. Follower reports variously preserve reward in age or identify Hell."}]}
{"id": "95:4/q16", "question": "What ancillary claims about Qur'anic eloquence are recorded?", "turns_on": "Whether excellence lies in meaning-led expression, composition, rare diction, sound pattern, or broader content.", "positions": [{"id": "95:4/q16/p1", "position": "Qur'anic eloquence is meaningful expression in the best verbal form, with harmonious wording and arrangement.", "reasons": "Al-Rummani ranks its eloquence at the highest miraculous level and lists ten branches; al-Khattabi describes word, meaning, and their organizing bond and says the Qur'an perfects all three across creed, law, ethics, and reports. Bint al-Shati records their differing accounts of levels, and al-Baqillani's combination of meanings and wording. Al-Jurjani says trained judgment detects subtle compositional merit, illustrated by al-Buhturi's reports and Ibn al-Mu'tazz's verse."}, {"id": "95:4/q16/p2", "position": "Qur'anic endings are eloquent when meaning leads the sound; forced saj' reverses that order.", "reasons": "Al-Rummani contrasts fawasil with saj', giving the soothsayer and Musaylima as poor examples, and allows identical or nearby ending letters when context keeps meanings clear. Bint al-Shati prefers his account, questions al-Baqillani's clause-length distinction, and says allowing saj' does not entail sarfah."}, {"id": "95:4/q16/p3", "position": "Rare vocabulary, mere correctness, and pronunciation do not explain the Qur'an's inimitability.", "reasons": "Al-Jurjani says people familiar with rare words could answer in kind, while challenging others would be like asking Arabs to speak Turkish. Umar's praise of Zuhayr and anecdotes about al-Hajjaj, Yahya ibn Ya'mar, and poetic transmission illustrate the limits of obscurity and routine parsing. Metaphor works by asserting the borrowed quality itself, rather than merely substituting a label; he cites 12:31 and lion, king, and musk examples."}, {"id": "95:4/q16/p4", "position": "Some locate the miracle in the Qur'an's values, parables, and laws; Bint al-Shati questions whether this accounts for the early challenge.", "reasons": "She observes that the Meccan challenge preceded the completion of legislation and records al-Khattabi and al-Baqillani linking meanings with wording."}]}
{"id": "95:4/q17", "question": "What other linguistic and textual observations are included?", "turns_on": "", "positions": [{"id": "95:4/q17/p1", "position": "The codices were checked, and reports of scribal error can refer to dialect or choice among allowed ahruf.", "reasons": "Al-Suyuti reconciles reports about Umar, Uthman, and Aisha by proposing an early correction of non-Quraysh spelling such as al-tabuwah for al-tabut. Ibn Ashtah and Ibn Jabara explain Aisha's 'error' as selection among seven ahruf; Sa'id ibn Jubayr treats a scribe's grammatical error as a dialectal reading."}, {"id": "95:4/q17/p2", "position": "The basic sense of bāʾ is attachment, literal or figurative.", "reasons": "Al-Zarkashi gives joining two things and passing by a place as examples."}, {"id": "95:4/q17/p3", "position": "A singular expression may distribute over only part of a referent.", "reasons": "Al-Farra illustrates this with the verse about Abu Bakr's giving, 92:18."}]}
{"id": "95:5/q01", "question": "What does being returned to the lowest of the low mean?", "turns_on": "Whether the descent names an observable bodily reversal, a final place or form of punishment, or corruption of the human's original moral disposition; the following exception is a major test.", "positions": [{"id": "95:5/q01/p1", "position": "Return to decrepit old age, with bodily weakness and sometimes lost reason.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAbbās, ʿIkrima, Ibrāhīm, Qatāda and others describe strength, beauty, senses, movement, voice and intellect ebbing; 16:70, 22:5 and 36:68 parallel the reversal. Al-Ṭabarī prefers this visible change because even deniers see aging, whereas they deny Hell; it proves resurrection (95:7). Al-Ḍaḥḥāk and al-Kalbī liken the elder to a child. Al-Farrāʾ and Ibn ʿAṭiyya say generic humanity need not imply every individual ages so far. Ibn Qutayba, al-Thaʿlabī, al-Wāḥidī and al-Baghawī compare the weak, ill and children, with senile elders lower still. Al-Zamakhsharī and al-Nasafī detail bent backs, white hair, wrinkled skin, weakened senses and gait; Abū Ḥayyān calls that elaboration excessive. Bursawī cites a Persian poem; Corpus Coranicum cites Qurʾanic usage, Arabic poetry and radda against Birkeland's Hell argument. Al-Ḥākim authenticated the Ibn ʿAbbās report on reciters according to al-Durr. Ibn ʿĀshūr objects that bodily aging ill fits the emphatic oath and the sūra's purpose; Ibn Kathīr and al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī object that believers also age, making the apparent exception difficult. Baghawī connects Ibrāhīm's explanation of continuing reward in old age to the sequence from excellent creation through lowering and the believers' exception. Ibn ʿAbbās' report also says the human was first made upright rather than face-down before reaching old age. Ibn ʿĀshūr objects that the senility reading fits the sūra's purpose poorly and hardly warrants an oath."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p2", "position": "God casts the unbeliever into Hell or its lowest depths.", "reasons": "Al-Ḥasan, Mujāhid, Abū al-ʿĀliya, Ibn Zayd and others transmit this reading. ʿAlī describes Hell's gates as descending and being filled from below. Al-Wāḥidī, Ibn Kathīr and others cite the connected exception for believers and compare 103:2–3; al-Qushayrī says the general opening then narrows to disbelievers. Al-Nuḥḥās reports al-Ṭabarī's opposing argument: the audience witnesses aging but denies the Fire. Ibn ʿĀshūr cites 4:145 for the lowest depth. Birkeland argues ordinary aging cannot explain exceptional humiliation, but Corpus Coranicum rejects his conclusion. Ibn ʿAbbās' reported poem of ʿAlī uses the phrase for the depth near Hell. Abū al-ʿĀliya specifies that the person in Hell has the worst image. Qatāda reads the oath's answer as 95:4 and the later judgment question as a call to certainty because God's proof has come."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p3", "position": "The person becomes one of Hell's people, hideous in form; some reports specify the form of a pig.", "reasons": "Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Nasafī, al-Bayḍāwī and al-Ālūsī connect the ugliness to ingratitude for fine creation. Abū al-ʿĀliya specifically reports a pig form, while other descriptions say the ugliest shape without naming an animal. Al-Ālūsī favors the Judgment Day reading as most contextual. Bursawī says inner traits become outward forms at resurrection; Ibn Burjān adds an animal or vermin form in the intermediate realm and disfigurement afterward. Abū al-ʿĀliya joins the worst bodily image specifically to being in Hell."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p4", "position": "People fall into disbelief, misguidance, and moral or spiritual baseness.", "reasons": "Al-Zajjāj and al-Qurṭubī compare humanity's loss and believers' exception in 103:2–3. Al-Biqāʿī says desire defeats reason, prompting idolatry, injustice and falsehood; rational people thus sink beneath unaccountable beasts and deserve punishment. Quṭb similarly contrasts animals' faithfulness to their nature with humans' capacity to rise even beyond angels, citing the Ascension. Ibn ʿĀshūr locates the baseness especially in belief: idolatry, deifying time and denying the Creator despite 51:21, and lists human sacrifice, infanticide and burning widows among its moral results. Al-Qāshānī depicts the veiled soul imprisoned in nature. Al-Iṣlāḥī invokes choice, innate guidance and consequent divine humiliation. Samarrai also includes the unbeliever's distressed earthly life, citing 20:124 and 22:31. Asad ascribes decline to human acts and omissions; al-Biqāʿī and Ibn ʿĀshūr stress the initial sound disposition."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p5", "position": "For the disbeliever, decline runs from youth to age and finally to Hell.", "reasons": "Ibn ʿAbbās gives this successive course and adduces a line attributed to ʿAlī using the low expression for a depth by Hell."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p6", "position": "The lowest are idolaters, while the human in the preceding clause is Muḥammad.", "reasons": "Al-Durr explicitly marks this Ibn ʿAbbās report weak; it also calls the four caliphs the following exception and assigns geographical senses to the oaths."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p7", "position": "Human arrogance is brought low through bodily filth that recalls created dependence.", "reasons": "Al-Qurṭubī's reported explanation compares pretensions to divinity with Pharaoh's claim in 79:24; humiliation restores awareness of God's decree."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p8", "position": "The basest person exploits another person's religion for gain.", "reasons": "In Mālik's report, Rabīʿa approved this answer; Ibn ʿĀshūr applies it to polytheist leaders who secured power by misleading their followers into idol worship."}, {"id": "95:5/q01/p9", "position": "The phrase can embrace age, Hell, moral decline, and distress together.", "reasons": "Samarrai says the wording admits all transmitted readings; the verse endings intentionally carry multiple senses. Elmalılı traces a broad reversal of purity, health, knowledge and dignity into weakness, ignorance, pain, death and Hell."}]}
{"id": "95:5/q02", "question": "What does ثُمَّ indicate here?", "turns_on": "Whether the particle locates a later event in time, emphasizes the rank difference, or does both.", "positions": [{"id": "95:5/q02/p1", "position": "A delay in time after humanity's excellent creation.", "reasons": "Elmalılı cal
<<part 4 ends; continues in part 5>>
